Abortion Pros and Cons
Below are ten "reasons" given by the Pro-Death side of the issue and show that instead of supporting or justifying the killing of innocent life, these reasons, when truthfully presented, are 10 powerful arguments against abortion...just like the first list of ten. The pros are listed followed by the cons.
Pro-Choice (Or pro death reasons that abortion is right)
1. Nearly all abortions take place in the first trimester, when a fetus cannot exist independent of the mother. As it is attached by the placenta and umbilical cord, its health is dependent on her health, and cannot be regarded as a separate entity as it cannot exist outside her womb.
The truth: Even after a baby (not a fetus) is born he or she is not able to exist independent of the mother or someone to meet the basic needs of food, shelter and protection from the many dangers of living outside the womb. Dependence on another is not a reason to kill the helpless.
2. The concept of personhood is different from the concept of human life. Human life occurs at conception, but fertilized eggs used for in vitro fertilization are also human lives and those not implanted are routinely thrown away. Is this murder, and if not, then how is abortion murder?
The truth: Yes it is murder! The unlawful taking of a human life is murder and since "reason" number 2 agrees that life begins at conception, this is a pro life argument against abortion.
3. Adoption is not an alternative to abortion, because it remains the woman's choice whether or not to give her child up for adoption. Statistics show that very few women who give birth choose to give up their babies - less than 3% of white unmarried women and less than 2% of black unmarried women.
The truth: The fact that it remains the mother's choice to keep her baby, and most do, does nothing to justify the continued killing of innocent life in the womb. The fact that most mothers keep their babies is strong evidence that the God-given natural affection for her baby urges her to keep and raise her child.....another argument Against Abortion!
4. Abortion is a safe medical procedure. The vast majority of women - 88% - who have an abortion do so in their first trimester. Medical abortions have less than 0.5% risk of serious complications and do not affect a woman's health or future ability to become pregnant or give birth.
The Truth: The fact is, although abortion is said to be legal by our corrupt judicial system, it is not safe and easy and certainly not without very serious harmful and long lasting physical, emotional, psychological, as well as spiritual consequences. "Reason" number 4 is full of outright lies which are obvious to anyone who does even a little research. The world is full of women who regret their abortion, a lot of guilt and bad emotions.
5. In the case of rape or incest, forcing a woman made pregnant by this violent act would cause further psychological harm to the victim. Often a woman is too afraid to speak up or is unaware she is pregnant, thus the morning after pill is ineffective in these situations.
The Truth: This lame "reason" is predicated on the premise that the victim of rape can kill an innocent baby. Abortion in the case of rape is at the expense of the emotional, physical and mental stability of thousands of women, as well as the lives of children. Rape is a horrendous crime that leaves a woman in a state of mental, physical and emotional turmoil. When a woman becomes pregnant as a result of rape (which happens less than 1 per cent of the time), abortion will not take away the trauma, the nightmares, the pain---it will only ad to them!
6. Abortion is not used as a form of contraception. Pregnancy can occur even with responsible contraceptive use. Only 8% of women who have abortions do not use any form of birth control, and that is due more to individual carelessness than to the availability of abortion.
The Truth: Abortion certainly is used after conception so technically it is not contraceptive, but that is totally beside the point. most abortions are performed for "contraceptive purposes". That is, few abortions are had because a woman has been a victim of rape or incest or because a pregnancy would endanger her life, or because she expects to have a handicapped or deformed newborn rather, most abortions are had because men and women who do not want to have a baby are having sexual intercourse and facing pregnancies they did not plan for and did not want. because their contraceptive failed, or because they failed to use a contraceptive, they then resort to abortion as a backup. Again this "reason" is instead a powerful argument against abortion...the murdering of innocent life for "contraceptive purposes".
7. The ability of a woman to have control of her body is critical to civil rights. Take away her reproductive choice and you step onto a slippery slope. If the government can force a woman to continue a pregnancy, what about forcing a woman to use contraception or undergo sterilization?
The truth: The baby in the womb is not "her body", it is a separate human life (see pro death reason #2) protected by God's law and the constitution of the United States. Our government not only has the right, but the duty to prevent the murder of helpless innocent babies in the womb.
8. Taxpayer dollars are used to enable poor women to access the same medical services as rich women, and abortion is one of these services. Funding abortion is no different from funding a war in the Mideast. For those who are opposed, the place to express outrage is in the voting booth.
The truth: The fact that rich women have the money to pay for killing their babies does not in any way justify giving poor women the means to also kill their babies. Is it not ironic that funding abortion is compared to funding an unjust war to kill innocent (enemy?) men, women and children?
9.Teenagers who become mothers have grim prospects for the future. They are much more likely to leave of school; receive inadequate prenatal care; rely on public assistance to raise a child; develop health problems; or end up divorced.
The truth: Teenagers who become mothers do not have grim prospects for the future. This is a lie and completely ignores the fact that there are a multitude of ministries and organizations who are willing, ready and able to provide assistance to them and their baby. There is also adoption. When presented with the three options, motherhood, adoption or abortion in a factual manner, many women would choose life for their baby, not death.
10. Like any other difficult situation, abortion creates stress. Yet the American Psychological Association found that stress was greatest prior to an abortion, and that there was no evidence of post-abortion syndrome.
The truth: Hitler said that if you tell a lie often enough, loud enough and long enough, people will believe it. This seems to be the tactic used by the pro death crowd, particularly in these "reasons" for abortion. One common way to lie is to withhold the complete details. In 2007 over 2000 women testified in affidavits read by the us supreme court. Their testimony concerned the reality of post abortion stress syndrome. Their powerful stories of how they suffered and still suffer as a consequence of aborting their baby moved the court to rule as follows.
The court explicitly acknowledged that "it seems unexceptionable to conclude some women come to regret their choice to abort the infant life they once created and sustained." It ruled that "severe depression and loss of esteem can follow." Given those stakes, the court ruled: "The state has an interest in ensuring so grave a choice is well-informed."Read 10 Additional Arguments Against Abortion
Arguments Against Abortion
Pros and Cons About Abortion Arguments
The above facts simply point that abortions violate the commandment, "Thou shalt not kill". While the pros can present a logical case, the simple fact of the murder involved over rides all logic and convenience of terminating the pregnancy through abortion.
The Florida election primary race is in August Florida Senate Candidates
Ten CommandmentsThe Ten Commandments spoken by God from the top of Mount Sinai and addressed to the Children of Israel seven weeks after the Exodus from Egypt. Subsequently, they were inscribed by God upon the two stone Tablets of the Covenant and given to Moses to be placed in the Ark of the Covenant in the Sanctuary and later in the Temple built by Solomon. According to the Bible, the Ten Commandments are the terms of the Covenant between God and the Israelites at Sinai (Ex. 34:27-28). To impress upon them the unique and profound importance of this Revelation of God's commands, the Israelites were told to prepare themselves by sanctifying themselves, cleansing themselves and their garments, and refraining from sexual intercourse. To further enhance the Commandments event, the words were accompanied with thunder and lightning and blasts from heaven.
Ten Commandments - The Ten Commandments - Ten Commandments
Ron Paul for President Pro Life CandidateRead about Ron Paul at: Ron Paul for President
Ron Paul sponsored the Sanctity of Life Act. It removes the jurisdiction from the federal courts which allows the states to pass protection to the unborn. Instead of waiting years for a Constitutional Amendment, this would happen immediately, by majority vote in the Congress and a presidents signature. It is a much easier way to accomplish this, by following what our Constitution directs us. Instead of new laws, let us just use what we have and pass this type of legislation.
Pro Life Hand Fans and Bumper StickersSend them a message with pro life hand fans and bumper stickers. Hand Fans Paper Hand Fans bumper stickers
Pro Life Yard Signs
Pro life yard signs makes the campaign event a success.
Yard Signs
Campaign Signs Corrugated campaign Yard Signs
Anti-Abortion Yard Signs
Chiropractic helps to improve your health.
Abortion Pros and Cons bring you these Bible verses
Revelation 2:6-106 But this you have, that you hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
7 “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.”’
8 “And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write,
‘These things says the First and the Last, who was dead, and came to life:
9 “I know your works, tribulation, and poverty (but you are rich); and I know the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
10 Do not fear any of those things which you are about to suffer. Indeed, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested, and you will have tribulation ten days. Be faithful until death, and I will give you the crown of life.
Return HOME Page Against Abortion