"While we all hope that young women will involve their parents in these decisions, mandating parental consent has the serious potential to do more harm than good. In fact, during congressional testimony, Dr. Warren Seigel, an expert in adolescent medicine, stated that legislation mandating parental involvement 'represents bad medicine and places politics before the health of our youth.'"
Source: Congressional Record transcript, Child Custody Protection Act, congress.gov, July 25, 2006
"As president, I would move, through patient persuasion, toward protecting more and more unborn children from abortion…
I used persuasion and incremental change to build a culture of life in Florida. We banned partial-birth abortion and required parental notification before minors could have abortions. We forced abortion clinics to abide by basic health and safety standards for women."
Source: Jeb Bush, "Jeb: As President I Will Move to Protect More Unborn Children from Abortion," jeb2016.com, Jan. 22, 2016
"I have fought tirelessly to defend the unborn and I will continue to do so.
As Solicitor General of Texas, I was proud to successfully defend a federal law that bans partial birth abortion and to lead 18 states in defending New Hampshire's parental notifications laws, both cases that we successfully won at the Supreme Court, marking two significant victories for life. While neither of these measures remove the scourge of abortion entirely, they continue shine the light on the atrocity and move us closer to doing so."
Source: Ted Cruz, "Cruz: We Must Defend the Sanctity of Every Life," theiowarepublican.com, July 21, 2015
"Hello, this is Carly Fiorina. In California, a 13-year-old girl can have a surgical abortion without either of her parents ever knowing about it, please help us put the parental notification initiative on the California ballot in 2016…
Parental notification would require a parent or guardian be notified before an abortion is performed on an under 18 year old girl."
Source: Californians for Parental Rights, "Video and Audio," caparentalrights.org (accesssed Feb. 4, 2016)
"The record I am proudest of in my tenure of over a decade in the governor's office is having signed numerous pieces of pro-life legislation, including a ban on partial birth abortion. Another bill established a woman's right to know, ensuring her consent to an abortion is an informed one, based on the same information she would be given if she were removing her tonsils instead of her baby. Equally important was legislation [in March 2005] mandating parents be informed and provide consent before the serious surgical procedure of an abortion could be performed on a minor. (At the time, parental consent seemed appropriate enough to be required for a child given an aspirin at school, but not an abortion in a clinic!)"
Source: Mike Huckabee, From Hope to Higher Ground: My Vision for Restoring America's Greatness, 2007
[Editor's Note: As Governor of Ohio, Kasich signed a bill (HB.63) into law that strengthened the existing parental consent law in Nov. 2011. The addition made it more difficult for judges to bypass the requirement that parents be informed and consent to an abortion for a minor. As a US Representative (R-OH), in 1999 Kasich voted in favor of the Child Custody Protection Act that would have made it a crime to transport a minor across state lines to obtain an abortion to circumvent parental notification and consent laws."]
"With the rights of parents and the safety of our nation's daughters at risk, Congress must take action to prevent underage abortions by giving states the federal backing necessary to enforce their parental involvement laws. These laws allow teenagers to receive the advice and guidance of a loved one before undergoing a procedure for which they may not be medically or emotionally prepared. Under current law, minors are subject to the exploitation and safety risks that often come from an overzealous interstate abortion industry."
"We are not going back to the days when women had to risk their lives to end an unwanted pregnancy. The decision about abortion must remain a decision for the woman and her doctor to make, not the government."
[Editor's Note: In 2006 Bernie Sanders voted No on the Child Interstate Abortion Notification Act (S.403). The act would have amended the federal criminal code to "prohibit taking minors across State lines in circumvention of laws requiring the involvement of parents in abortion decisions."]