According to the first amendment everyone has the right to the pursuit of happiness. What if someone is only happy if they are using marijuana? If that is the case then the United States gov't is taking away the pursuit of happiness for Americans which is not what the founding fathers wanted to happen.
Why not? If everyone smoked pot this world would be at peace. I mean, I'm a smoker and I see nothing wrong with it. I love it.. It makes me wanna do stuff, like work. Makes me wanna get up and clean the whole house, go do yard work, anything. It puts me to ease when I'm stressed. I just love it
I believe that drugs are positive here is why
Cannabis has been used for over 10,000 years and not one single death has EVER been recorded.
• It is not addictive and is actually far less addictive than caffeine
• If legalized, far less more minors would be using Cannabis
or weed would be sold in stores, valid ID must be given and the user must be at least 21 years of age. After customers start buying from these weed dispensaries, drug dealers would vanish and the ones that stick around would be most likely dealing hard drugs
• Marijuana is not a gateway drug, it's just the dealers persistently persuading their customers to try harder drugs because they know marijuana is not addictive. If they were to get them to at least try the harder drugs, they would get addicted and come back for more, giving the dealer never ending business
• Marijuana cures and prevents Alzheimer and Glaucoma, helps relieve stress, anxiety, depression, slows down tumor growth, and helps relieve pain for chemo/radiation therapy patients as well.
• If legalized, marijuana can be taxed which would produce billions of dollars annually in profit which in turn would help our nation get out of debt. Cannabis farms can be set up as well, and growing and harvesting marijuana can become a profession thus lowering the unemployment rate.
• Does not lead to or cause lung cancer
I am 13 years old and I am more informed about marijuana than any of you Anti- Cannabis supporters are. Here are some major facts that help support my claim.1) Cannabis has been used for over 10,000 years and not one single death has EVER been recorded. It is not addictive and is actually far less addictive than caffeine. 2)If legalized, far less more minors would be using Cannabis. Why you ask? I believe if weed would be sold in stores, valid ID must be given and the user must be at least 21 years of age. After customers start buying from these weed dispensaries, drug dealers would vanish and the ones that stick around would be most likely dealing hard drugs (Meth,Cocaine,Heroine). 3)Marijuana is not a gateway drug, it's just the dealers persistently persuading their customers to try harder drugs because they know marijuana is not addictive. If they were to get them to at least try the harder drugs, they would get addicted and come back for more, giving the dealer never ending business. 4)Marijuana cures and prevents Alzheimer and Glaucoma, helps relieve stress, anxiety, depression, slows down tumor growth, and helps relieve pain for chemo/radiation therapy patients as well. 5)If legalized, marijuana can be taxed which would produce billions of dollars annually in profit which in turn would help our nation get out of debt. Cannabis farms can be set up as well, and growing and harvesting marijuana can become a profession thus lowering the unemployment rate. It also does not lead to or cause lung cancer.
Why, There are many factors why, This drug is helps with eye sight, In the mean time it still does the same damage cigarettes do, I never heard of cigarettes helping in any way shape or form. But it's legal. This drug is empowered to drug dealers to make high wages for it. Also it is very dangerous while dealing with a drug dealer because they are a wild card. Who know's what they did to it, laced it with other things, etc. Legalizing it would reduce the prices, it'd be taxed making a lot of money from that alone. Also set a age limit on buying or use of it just as cigarettes. Then put a limit on how high you can be like alcohol. It's funny, Weed makes you mellow out and happy and it's illegal. But alcohol leads to drunk driving accidents, deaths in the process and rapes of women, etc. and it's legal.
It should be, because everyone at Massey High School smokes weed during interval and lunch! Which means everyone's on a good buzz. When it comes to class, everyone is sleeping, therefore the teachers won't have to worry about anyone acting up. Then at interval and lunch, everyone's on the munchies and eats their lunch. That way, none of their food is put to waste!
Last time I checked this was a free country. The people that immigrated to this country, did so to escape tyranny. If you don't know what that means, it means oppressive power over the people in a particular group by it's leaders. Why should the majority of us suffer, because the super rich feel a certain way about a particular issue? This is not the makings of a free country, this is tyranny. We as humans should have the option to put whatever we want in our bodies; this is not to say that children should have that right. They are young and we need to protect our young. But as for adults, we should never be refused this right. If you can demand for us to fight in battle and die for you. Then, we should be able to choose what we put in our bodies.
Marijuana is less harmful then any other drug. Like cigarettes, it messes with your lungs. I mean, marijuana would do a little damage, but not that much. Drinking is bad too. Drinking is worse than anything, but people still drink knowing that it does harm. Marijuana should be legalized. That's what I think.
Although there are some negative side effects such as impaired short-term memory and increased risk of lung cancer, it is relatively harmless in comparison to other drugs. It is less harmful than cigarettes and alcohol as well. Furthermore, have you tried weed? It's awesome! If weed were taxed, it would bring revenue into the system. Right now, the government is using the tax-payers' money to keep harmless stoners and dealers in jail. Prison is for hardcore criminals, not smokers.
what people put into there own bodies is thier own business
if you want to eat castor beans its your own business and to respond to the second opposing argument everything you just said can be from alcohol also,and i am not selfish because i believe in freedom for everyone no matter what thier drug of choice is and people driving high are no where near as dangerous as people driving drunk, alcohol also slows down your reflexes and im well aware of what im doing when im high, so your argument is pointless and how often do you see accidents where the user was high at the time, not very often, you hear more about drunk drivers. People that smoke pot aren't going to be showing up to work high everyday if pot was legal the same rules would apply as alcohol you would get fired if you came to work high. and making marijuana legal wouldn't make it more accessible to minors, if a minor walked up to a drug dealer right now and said can i buy some weed he's not going to say can i see your ID he going to sell the minor the drug and make an untaxed income for himself but if we put it in gas stations or something the minor would walk up to the cashier (not drug dealers with guns) and ask can i buy some weed and the cashier will say can i see your ID and the minor wont be able to buy it. but if someone of age bought some he would also pay taxes on it and the drug cartels won't be the ones profiting there will be companies like marlboro who grow and sell the product instead.
The biggest arguments I always hear, is that it will lower crime, boost the economy, and help with medical purposes. that's the biggest load of BS I have ever heard. First regarding crime. Just because you legalize something won't lower crime. All you are doing is not calling it a crime anymore. We might as well legalize breaking and entering and grand theft auto, this way everyone will have a car and we'll have less crime. It's absurd. Second, the economy will not get a boost. Imagine how many lazy people there will be. They won't be able to work, because they're completely stoned. Pot heads barely have the energy to get off the couch to do anything. And third, medicinal purposes, so instead of finding the chemical or whatever it is in marijuana that helps people get better, why not just extract that or synthesize it and give that to people who need it... not smoke pot. What saddens me is how much time is wasted on debating this topic. It's no where near as important and so many other things. You want to lower crime, stop doing drugs. There will be no more drug dealers if you educate people to not use but stay away. You want to help the economy, don't throw your money away on drugs. Buy good things for your body, like healthy foods. Which then leads to medicinal purposes, eat well, live well, stay healthy, use money to make better medicine. This whole argument is to justify the unhealthy, addictive, lazy pot smokers so that they don't get arrested or feel guilty that they are stupid enough to smoke marijuana. Alcohol and tobacco should be illegal too.
First off, I have done weed before and never plan on doing it ever again. I used to smoke multiple times a day everyday, and I used to think it was great, but my opinion changed after it almost ruined my life. I always hear that marijuana does not affect your health in any way negatively. Well you're wrong. It's just common sense that inhaling something into your lungs is unhealthy. It also affects the brain. Not only will it affect you physically in the future, but it will affect you emotionally too. Most people smoke weed because they are stressed or depressed. Well you might feel great while you're high, but as soon as it wears off, your sober life is going to seem horrible again. If you get caught with it, your loved ones will be very disappointed in you. You'll most likely lose all your friends because the only thing you'll care about is getting high. It may also affect you financially. Once marijuana becomes your new obsession, you'll spend all of your money on it. Unless you are selling it on the side, you'll become broke. I had a really bad trip once on weed and I saw what my life would be like if I continued using it, and it wasn't pretty... I have other reasons why I disapprove of it being legalized, but I won't get into that... I just feel there are too many teens out there that keep believing all this BS about how marijuana is so great. The majority of the people in this world are brainwashed on this subject. If you ever ask someone that has smoked weed before and quit, ask them why. I'm sure they'll tell you that it almost ruined their life. When our parents and teachers told us to stay away from drugs and marijuana, they weren't kidding, and there's a reason why they said it! OPEN YOUR EYES AND WAKE UP AMERICA!
Marijuana is an addicting substance that damages your health and judgement. It is way worse for the respiratory system than any cigarettes. It damages your brain so that one is not capable of making good judgements. Only people are addicted to Marijuana already would argue for the legalization of it!
Many people believe that marijuana is harmless, but that is completely not true. Marijuana can cause cancer and leads to lung damage, brain damage, and violence. No matter what people say, the government can't legalize marijuana, as it would be dangerous to society. Most states are doing the right thing by keeping it illegal.
Globally, 1.3 billion people smoke. Each year marijuana causes five million premature deaths.
Half of them will die in middle age.
And it will affect your brain and make you crazy , and Legalization of marijuana would worsen schools performance .
Do you admit that marijuana has medicinal benefit beyond its application as a pain killer ?
Marijuana is responsible for more than 100,000 deaths in Europe alone. It is a gateway drug that leads to the use of much more hard core drugs including heroin. One in every 10 marijuana users end up using heroin within 5 months and one in every 2 of these heroin users end up dead within 3 years.
I don't understand what is wrong with people don't they understand how stupid this is. I mean are you kidding, they are so whacked out they cant even tell the difference of good and bad. What is the point to get happy for an hour? It is useless and dumb.
Pot is a gateway drug. One study found that youth (12 to 17 years old) who use marijuana are 85 times more likely to use cocaine than kids who do not use pot, and that 60% of the kids who smoke pot before the age of 15 move on to cocaine. Moreover, it causes a higher death rate due to being high while driving, we have already learned from the legalization in Washington state that this is true. America must keep it illegal.
I've seen a couple studies which suggest that if marijuana is legalized, regulated and then taxed, we could have an additional revenue source up to $14 billion a year. Additional revenue is good right? Sure, so long as there aren't other costs which may offset it. Based on state & local tax revenue for alcohol sales in 2010, we made roughly $6 billion dollars. But also in 2010 we spent approx $132 billion dealing with drunk drivers (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration FARS data, 2010). Recent studies suggest that individuals that have smoked marijuana within several hours prior to driving have an increased risk of getting into an accident. I'm not particularly interested in seeing the country lose additional billions (not to mention lives) in dealing with drivers under the influence of marijuana. While it can be said that the vast majority of users are responsible with their drinking and/or marijuana use, there needs to be a threshold on how much we're willing to tolerate the irresponsible. Clearly their is a financial cost associated with them and the country doesn't have deep pockets.
They say legalize it because then it can be regulated and create taxes and what not. I call bull. What is going to stop people from buying from illegal drug dealers, drug dealers with more potent cheaper weed? Absolutely nothing. They say it will help keep it from adolescents. My question is what's the difference in finding a dealer down the street or having a friend buy it at a store? I'm not seeing the advantage here.