As voters head to the polls they'll be asked to weigh in on the full legalization of marijuana in Massachusetts.
Ahead of that vote the proponents and opponents of the ballot question make their case.
Pro from Jim Borghesani of Yes on 4
Marijuana prohibition has failed at every level. It is time to actually start controlling marijuana in Massachusetts through the type of taxed and regulated system that is working well in Colorado and other states.
A taxed and regulated system will help veterans, federal employees and other medical marijuana patients and caregivers access their medicine of choice without fear of losing their federal benefits or breaking the law.
The Massachusetts marijuana market is thriving, and is completely controlled by criminals. A regulated and taxed system would move commerce from street dealers to licensed, taxpaying businesses under the control of state regulators and local authorities.
As the recent black helicopter raids show, hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars are being wasted on enforcing unworkable laws on a substance that is less dangerous than alcohol. A taxed and regulated system would return a minimum of $100 million in new revenues to taxpayers and would free up law enforcement resources for more serious crimes.
Taxed and regulated systems are working in Colorado and other states. Teen use has stayed flat, motor vehicle accidents involving marijuana have not increased, millions of dollars in new revenues have gone to schools, job training programs and other worthy causes, and thousands of new jobs have been created.
The same prohibitionist scare arguments being made in Massachusetts were heard in Colorado and other states. None of the dire prohibitionist predictions have come to pass. Polls show that more voters in legal states support their taxed and regulated systems than when the systems were first passed into law. Regulated and taxed markets are working in those states and will work in Massachusetts.
This is not about “big marijuana.” This is about smart public policy. The Cannabis Control Commission, not the industry, will have full control over all products sold. The Commission will determine what, if any, advertising will be allowed. It will also place strict restrictions on packaging and labeling. Question 4 expressly forbids all marketing to young people.
Con from Corey Welford of The Campaign for a Safe and Healthy Massachusetts
Question 4 is about more than the concept of legalization, it is about the commercialization of the billion dollar marijuana industry in Massachusetts.
Question 4 would authorize the advertising, promotion, and sale of high potency edible products like candies and sodas that are a particular risk for our kids and teens.
We will see an inevitable increase in drugged driving deaths - marijuana-involved deaths doubled in Washington state - and there is no Breathalyzer equivalent to detect or punish those who drive impaired on our roads.
People will be able to (develop) mini pot farms on their property worth tens of thousands of dollars, even over the objection of neighbors, or if they are close to schools. This has created a new black market and decreased property values.
There are no limits on the number of marijuana shops and will greatly change the landscape in our communities, and in Colorado there are more pot shops than McDonalds and Starbucks combined.
Voters can believe in the concept of legalizing marijuana, but believe that this specific, deeply flawed proposal is the wrong solution at the wrong time. People should vote no and send it back to the drawing board.