Editors’ Note Appended
To the Editor:
Much of the country — with The New York Times regrettably in the vanguard — is advocating the reckless addition of a third drug, marijuana, to two drugs currently legal for adults: alcohol and tobacco. These two legal drugs are the leading causes of preventable illness.
The legal status of a drug has dramatic impact on its use. In the last 30 days, 52 percent of Americans 12 and older used alcohol, 27 percent used tobacco and only 7 percent used marijuana. The dramatically lower level of marijuana use reflects its illegal status, not its appeal. Why is it in our nation’s interest to see marijuana use climb? Since when is smoking a program that we promote?
The best policy to protect public health is one that reduces, not increases, marijuana use. There are plenty of ways to achieve this goal, including a strong public education effort focused on the negative health effects of marijuana.
There are reasons why employers, including the United States government, prohibit marijuana use in the workplace. There are reasons why marijuana emergency room admissions are reported at the rate of 1,250 a day and 455,000 a year, and why highway crashes double for marijuana users.
We cannot ignore the negative effects that legalization would have on under-age use and addiction, highway safety, treatment costs, mental health problems, emergency room admissions, workplace accidents and productivity, and personal health.
PETER BENSINGER
ROBERT L. DuPONT
Chicago, July 30, 2014
Mr. Bensinger was administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration from 1976 to 1981. Mr. DuPont, president of the Institute for Behavior and Health, was director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse from 1973 to 1978. They are co-founders of Bensinger, DuPont & Associates, which provides employee assistance program, gambling helpline and drug-testing services.
To the Editor:
I applaud the editorial board for highlighting the disastrous social costs of marijuana prohibition and for taking a courageous position in calling for national legalization. I became a mother in 1971, the same year that President Nixon declared the “war on drugs.” Twenty years later my son was arrested for marijuana possession, which began a decade of cycling through the criminal justice system for nonviolent drug offenses.
The outlawing of marijuana translated into a war that has been waged against families like mine for over four decades. Prohibition has robbed children of their futures, while building a huge prison-industrial complex. It has caused countless casualties, wasted taxpayer dollars, promoted discrimination and taken away basic human liberties.
Mothers were instrumental in ending alcohol prohibition in the 1930s, and once again moms are uniting to end marijuana prohibition for the sake of our children and future generations.
GRETCHEN BURNS BERGMAN
Spring Valley, Calif., July 28, 2014
The writer is co-founder and executive director of a New PATH (Parents for Addiction Treatment and Healing).
To the Editor:
I am concerned by the editorial board’s stance in favor of marijuana legalization. It has been only six months since retail marijuana sales began in Colorado, and just weeks since the rollout in Washington State. A robust, objective analysis of outcomes in these two states is the only way to determine the best policy on this issue, but for now, it is too early to make a sound judgment.
What we do know is that marijuana is harmful, particularly for the still-developing adolescent brain. As we’ve seen with alcohol and tobacco, imposing a minimum age will probably not be enough to prevent a spike in teenage use and addiction.
Considering this likely consequence, not to mention the economic burden of regulating the drug and treating new problematic users, we may find that the societal costs of legalization outweigh the benefits. However, if we make pronouncements before we see the research, we’re jumping the gun. Let’s let the facts speak for themselves.
HOWARD P. MEITINER
New York, July 28, 2014
The writer is president and chief executive of Phoenix House, a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center.
To the Editor:
As your July 27 editorial “Repeal Prohibition, Again” says: “There are legitimate concerns about marijuana on the development of adolescent brains. For that reason, we advocate the prohibition of sales to people under 21.”
Our concern about legalization is its effect on kids. Society may not do much better at enforcing this restriction on sale and marketing of marijuana to kids than we have with alcohol and tobacco. Research shows that use of any of these drugs in adolescence — especially early adolescence — significantly heightens risks of substance use disorders in later life.
We need to provide a much better prevention and treatment infrastructure, which expanded access to marijuana and increasing teenage use will require. That begins with limiting marijuana marketing that kids will be exposed to, and equipping parents with information about the very real health risks of early use.
These are not details to be sorted later, but vital considerations. These are the considerations that matter most to us, and to most parents, including — research shows — those favoring legalization.
STEVE PASIERB
President and Chief Executive
Partnership for Drug-Free Kids
New York, July 29, 2014
The letter from Peter Bensinger and Robert L. DuPont has been revised to add their company affiliation to the identification line.