Federal law prohibits the possession, selling or harvesting of marijuana. But it is legal in four states, and many others have decriminalized the penalties associated with its use and possession of small amounts. Californians voted against legalized marijuana in 2010 but may see it on the ballot in November.
WHERE STATES STAND
Several initiatives to put legalized marijuana on the November 2016 election ballot have been withdrawn or did not qualify with enough signatures. The initiative with the greatest financial support has until July to gather the 365,880 signatures required for a chance to be on the ballot.
States most likely to vote on legalization of marijuana in 2016:
Of these states Nevada is the only one to have a qualified a legalized-marijuana initiative for the Nov. 8 ballot.
Marijuana arrests in California
Then-Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger signed legislation in 2010 that reduced the penalties for possession of less than an ounce of marijuana.
|Arrests for possession
|
|Arrests for sales
|
Source: FBI, Uniform Crime Reporting ProgramSource: FBI, Uniform Crime Reporting Program
OPINIONS ON LEGALITY
In 2015, 53 percent of people surveyed by Pew Research Center said the use of marijuana should be legal.
Opinions vary greatly based on age, ethnicity and political party.
MONEY RAISED
In 2012, Colorado became the first state to legalize marijuana for recreational use, allowing cultivated marijuana to be sold in state-regulated dispensaries.
Tax revenue raised in Colorado
Funds raised in Colorado
Colorado has a 10 percent retail tax on marijuana and a 15 percent excise tax for larger, wholesale transactions. The state collected $70 million in taxes on pot from June 2014 to July 2015, $30 million more than amount raised from taxes on alcohol.
Washington’s take
In February the average daily sales of marijuana in Washington state totaled $2.7 million. Jaime Smith, deputy communications director for the governor’s office, said, “The legalization initiative was not driven by a desire for a revenue, but it has provided a small assist for our state budget.” A report on legalized pot’s effects on public health and justice in Washington will be released in September.
Tax revenue raised in Washington
Washington weedscape
Ahead for California
The initiative with the most momentum to reach California’s 2016 ballot would enact a 15 percent sales tax, a $9.25-per-ounce excise tax for buds and $2.75 excise tax for leaves. In 2010, Californians voted against legalized marijuana with 53.5 percent of voters saying no.
SUPPORTERS AND DETRACTORS
Most people oppose federal enforcement of marijuana laws in states in which it has been legalized, according to a Pew Research Center survey in 2015.
|Legalization supporters
Reasons cited by the 53 percent of people in the 2015 surve who said pot should be legal.
|
|Opponents
Reasons cited by the 44 percent of people who said marijuana should not be legal.
|
Sources: Colorado Department of Revenue, Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, Pew Research Center, California Secretary of State, FBI
User Agreement
Comments are encouraged, but you must follow our Privacy Policy Policy & Terms of Use
Keep it civil and stay on topic. No profanity, vulgarity, racial slurs or personal attacks. People who harass others or joke about tragedies will be blocked. By posting your comment, you agree to allow Orange County Register Communications, Inc. the right to republish your name and comment in additional Register publications without any notification or payment.