Discount Tire gives $1 million to campaign against marijuana legalization
Discount Tire Co. has contributed $1 million to the campaign against an Arizona ballot measure that would legalize marijuana, according to state campaign finance records.
Scottsdale-based Discount Tire donated the money to a group called Arizonans for Responsible Drug Policy in Opposition to Prop. 205, according to campaign finance records from the Arizona Secretary of State’s office.
That is main no group against Proposition 205, which would legalizes pot.
Discount Tire representatives could not be reached for comment about the big donation against Prop. 205.
Voters will decide the measure on Nov. 8. It would have Arizona join Alaska, Colorado, Oregon and Washington in legalizing marijuana for recreational use.
The Arizona Chamber of Commerce & Industry and other business groups oppose the measure worrying about workplace injuries and higher drug use.
Construction machinery Empire Southwest LLC also donated another $150,000 to the no effort. Empire had already donated $50,000.
Discount Tire has more than 900 stores in 31 U.S. states. It is the largest privately held company in the state and one of the top 100 private companies in the U.S., according to Business Journal research and Forbes magazine. The company also is a big motor sports sponsor, which includes Nascar.
Discount Founder and Chairman Bruce Halle has net worth of $6.3 billion, putting him on the Forbes richest Americans list.
The $1 million donation is part of a big fundraising effort by the No on 205 campaign. An anti-legalization group out of Alexandria, Virginia, called SAM Action also recently donated $115,000, according to the Secretary of State records.
The Arizona Republican Party, Bennett Dorrance, a founding partner of real estate development firm DMB Associates and a Campbell Soup Co. heir, Christian businessman Foster Friess and Tucson developer Don Diamond have donated $10,000 each to the anti-legalization campaign.
Dorrance is worth $2.9 billion and also makes the Forbes richest list.
Discount Tire has faced some other political scrutiny this summer after some Phoenix-area stores displayed signs for the reelection of Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio. That upset some Arpaio critics.
Mike Sunnucks writes about residential and commercial real estate, government, law, sports business and workplace issues.