|
|
All the Reasons to
Clone Human Beings by
Simon Smith
Medical breakthroughs -
Human cloning technology is expected to result in several miraculous
medical breakthroughs. We may be able to cure cancer if cloning leads
to a better understanding of cell differentiation. Theories exist about
how cloning may lead to a cure for heart attacks, a revolution in
cosmetic surgery, organs for organ transplantation, and predictions
abound about how cloning technology will save thousands of lives. You
can read about many of the expected medical benefits in the essay "The
Benefits of Human Cloning."
Medical tragedies - Many
people have suffered accidental medical tragedies during their
lifetimes. Read about a girl who needs a kidney,
a burn victim, a girl born
with cosmetic deformities, a man who needs a
liver, a woman who is infertile because of
cancer, and a father who lost his only
son. All these people favor cloning and want the science to
proceed.
To cure infertility -
Infertile people are discriminated against. Men are made to feel like
they are not "real men." Women are made to feel as if they are useless
barren vessels. Worse, being infertile is often not considered a "real
medical problem" and insurance companies and governments are not
sympathetic. The current options for infertile couples are painful,
expensive, and heart-breaking. Cloning has the potential to change the
world for infertile couples almost overnight.
To fund research - People
whose lives have been destroyed or have not been able to reproduce in
this lifetime due to tragedy could arrange to have their DNA continued
and fund research at the same time. For example: A boy graduates from
high school at age 18. He goes to a pool party to celebrate. He
confuses the deep end and shallow end and dives head first into the
pool, breaking his neck and becoming a quadriplegic. At age 19 he has
his first urinary tract infection because of an indwelling urinary
catheter and continues to suffer from them the rest of his life. At age
20 he comes down with herpes zoster of the trigeminal nerve. He suffers
chronic unbearable pain. At age 21 he inherits a 10 million dollar trust
fund. He never marries or has children. At age 40 after hearing about
Dolly being a clone, he changes his will and has his DNA stored for
future human cloning. His future mother will be awarded one million
dollars to have him and raise him. His DNA clone will inherit a trust
fund. He leaves five million to spinal cord research. He dies feeling
that although he was robbed of normal life, his twin/clone will lead a
better life.
Bad parents - Did your
parents destroy your life? Were they alcoholic, child-beating
molesters? Did you never have a chance? Interestingly, human cloning
allows you the opportunity to participate in choosing the parents for
your clone.
A Child's right to be better than its
parents - It's been suggested that parents have a duty to see
that their children have better lives than they do. This may mean
making our children live longer, helping them to be resistant to cancer,
heart disease, any familial diseases, and all the other problems that
can be cured using what we learn from human cloning technology.
To take a step towards immortality
- Human cloning essentially means taking a human being's DNA and
reversing its age back to zero. Dr. Richard Seed,
one of cloning's leading proponents, hopes that cloning will help us
understand how to reverse DNA back to age 20 or whatever age we want to
be. Cloning would be a step towards a fountain of youth.
To make a future couple financially
secure - With human cloning you could give a couple in the
future both a child from your DNA and the financial assets from your
lifetime to start out financially secure instead of struggling as most
couples do now.
Because you believe in freedom
- Freedom sometimes means having tolerance for others and their
beliefs. In America, some people believe gun control and some don't.
Some people believe in one religion and others in another. In a free
society we know that we must tolerate some views that we don't agree
with so that we all may be free. For this reason human cloning should
be allowed.
To be a better parent -
Human cloning can improve the parent-child relationship. Raising a
clone would be like having a child with an instruction manual. You
would have a head start on the needs and talents of your child. We are
not saying that a clone would be a carbon copy with no individuality.
Our talents and desires are genetic, developmental, and environmental.
We would have a head start on understanding the genetic component of a
cloned child.
Endangered species could be saved
- Through the research leading up to human cloning we will perfect the
technology to clone animals, and thus we could forever preserve
endangered species, including human beings.
Animals and plants could be cloned
for medical purposes - Through the research leading up to
human cloning, we should discover how to clone animals and plants to
produce life-saving medications.
You want your clone to lead the life
that was meant to be yours - The Human Cloning Foundation has
been surprised by the number of people that write to say that they would
like to have a clone so that it may lead the life that was meant to be
theirs. Typically, these are people who have suffered some terrible
physical or mental handicap and feel robbed of the opportunities they
should have had in life. Some see this life as a sacrifice so that the
life of their clone may be enriched.
To have a better sense of identity
- If we had some information about ourselves, perhaps we could sooner or
better discovery who we are. A clone would have access to a tremendous
amount of information about his or her parent that could greatly help in
understanding one's psyche and physical attributes. All of this
information could provide a better sense of identity.
Because so many people want cloning
- Please read the dozens of essays by people from
all over the world in support of human cloning and published by the
Human Cloning Foundation.
Religious Freedom - At
least two religions, the Raelian Religion and the Summum Religion,
believe in cloning as one of their tenets.
Because of the special relationship
that twins have - Twins often have very special
relationships. While many people go through their lives never having a
special relationship with another person, there are stories of twins in
which they are so close they are perhaps psychically connected. More
than one person has written the Human Cloning Foundation (including a
twin that feels close to her identical twin) that since a clone is
virtually the equivalent of an identical twin, they suspect a very
special relationship would exist between a clone and its DNA parent.
Some twins describe their twin relationship as more wonderful and
meaningful any other relationship in their lives.
Economics - Countries that
fail to research human cloning will suffer economically. The industrial
revolution and Internet revolutions enriched the United States of
America. Biotechnology will lead the next economic revolution. Those
countries that jump in first will reap the rewards. Those who fail to
begin research right away will fall behind. As an example: Japan failed
to jump on the Internet bandwagon and is now playing catch-up. Japan has
banned human cloning and will probably suffer by falling behind during
the biotech revolution. One day in the not too far distant future, Japan
may realize its mistake.
Gay couples - From one of
our readers: "gay couples go through so much...not to mention all the
controversy...when they decide that they are ready for a baby. People
question their right to bring a child that technically isn't related to
them into a lifestyle that falls below societies views of
normal.....human cloning could allow two gay men to take 23 chromosomes
from each male and put them into a single egg to truly have a baby of
their own. also two gay women could use this technology to
conceive a
child of their own using their individual 23 chromosomes." (To our
knowledge the type of reproduction described here has not yet been done,
but someday it will probably be possible.)
A cure for baldness - From
one of our readers: "But how about the possibility of using cloning
technology to get more hair on a balding scalp. For example cloning can
be used to get more hair from a few sample hair follicles or grafts from
the patient's head and then grow them....later transplant the grafts
where it is needed. This will eliminate the need to do an incision in
back of the scalp for donor hair and will literally give the patient
MORE hair."
Because the sick will demand it
- Those resisting human cloning research will probably find themselves
shouted down by the sick and the maimed who desperately need such
research. Human cloning technology promises to cure many or all
incurable diseases and the moral weight of the dying and infirm will
undoubtedly sway the politicians more than the arguments of the healthy,
who often remain ignorant of the potential of human cloning, because
they have never been motivated by suffering to look desperately for a
cure.
Hope - On the Charlie Rose
television show on February 14th, 2001, three anti-cloners debated
against one reporter. The anti-cloners made the case for stem cell
research while alleging that cloning itself would not result in any
major scientific breakthroughs. It is likely that the anti-cloners are
quite wrong. Learning the process of reprogramming, differentiation, and
dedifferentiation is likely to result in just as many medical miracles as
stem cell research. The two lines of research go hand in hand and should
complement each other. The three anti-cloners came across as people who
would destroy hope. The kept alleging that things were impossible. They
reminded me of the same types of people who proclaimed that cloning was
impossible years ago. Furthermore, they seemed happy and willing to take
away the hope of infertile couples and others with severe diseases that
human cloning technology might one day lessen their suffering or save
their lives. The anti-cloners also seemed to feel that they had the
ability to predict the timing and course of science advancement, which
history has shown to be folly.
Living on through a later-born twin
- Some childless people feel that by being cloned by their later-born
twin would help them or their DNA to live on in the same sense that
people who have children live on.
If you know a good reason why human
cloning should be allowed please write it as an essay and submit it at our FORUM