With so much enhancement in medical science, cloning is slowly but surely looking like it could be in our near future. However, is it really an option that should be considered as a way to extend human life? Find out the pros and cons, and decide for yourself if cloning is worth the risks. Take an introduction to biology with an online class.
Pro: Reproductive Cloning
Reproductive cloning has a number of pros. Much of it relates to helping human families gain children, but there is also a benefit for the animal world. Take an online course in GCSE Biology. Here’s a brief list of the ways reproductive cloning can help:
- Parents with no eggs and sperm can create children that are genetically related.
- Same sex couples can have children without the use of donor sperm or donor eggs. The men would only require a surrogate to carry the clone until birth.
- Parents that have lost a child can have that child returned to them with a clone.
- Endangered animals can be cloned to save the species.
These all bring hope to people eager for children but unable to have their own or adopt. It can also bring about the recreation of species that have long since died, allowing scientists to fully study the species as a living creature instead of simply looking at images or bones.
Pro: Organ Replacement
Many believe that cloning can be used to replace failing organs. This will diminish the waiting list for organ donations and allow more people to be saved. Not only that, but because the organ is, in fact, your own organ, there would be less chance of rejection. Your body would recognize the new organ as your own. Create an A+ Biology research paper with an online class.
Pro: Genetic Research
Cloning could prove helpful in the research of genetics. Using cloning technologies, genetic researchers would have a better understanding of the composition of genes and the effects of genetic constituents on human traits. There is also the likely ability to alter genetic constituents in cloned humans, and cloning could help combat genetic diseases. Discover a mathematical way to observe biology with an online course.
Pro: Obtaining Desired Traits in Organisms
With the use of cloning, organisms can be customized to suit the needs of whatever research purposes being done. Using genetic alteration in plants and animals, researchers can replicate organisms needed for research. No longer would there be the worry of scientists harming creatures because these creatures would be cloned specifically for the purpose of research. Read an interesting article on questions for the GCSE exam.
Pro: Recovery from Traumatic Injury
Healing and recovery times could be lowered because of cloning. Using the person’s own cells, they will be able to recover that much faster and that much easier. Using their own cells, they would be given the chance to truly heal with less complications.
Con: Reproductive Cloning
There are a number of negatives involved with reproductive cloning, and they are listed below. Some of the arguments are religious in nature.
- Cloning children could foster an understanding that children can be designed and replicated to the parents’ wishes.
- There would be a lack of uniqueness and violate convictions regarding human individuality and freedom. Clones could be seen as less than human compared with non-clones.
- Children created by cloning would live in the shadow of the genetic donor, always having to live up to the expectations of a person they were created from. Imagine discovering that you are the clone of a child your parents lost, and you live your life always being compared to the dead child.
- 95% of animal cloning has ended in failure due to genetic defects, and cloning is considered unsafe because of it.
- Many believe that cloning is against God’s wishes because the clones would be created by man. Man would be playing God and create people that are unable to feel and empathize. There is also the belief that these clones would be created without a soul.
There are many more arguments against reproductive cloning, but this is a brief list of the main arguments. When thinking about cloning children designed and replicated to the parents’ wishes, consider the book My Sister’s Keeper in which Anna is the product of preimplantation genetic diagnosis and is born for the sole purpose of being a bone marrow plant for her older sister Kate.
Con: Increased Malpractice
While the cloning of body organs can be a great asset to extending human life, it could also cause a lot of malpractice. Along with the ability to clone desired traits, there could be the possibility of people deliberately reproducing undesired traits. This could lead to a rise in malpractices within society.
Con: Lack of Diversity
Cloning involves a process of creating identical genes. As such, there would be a lack of diversity in humankind. Scientists believe this lack of diversity will lower the human race’s ability to adapt. Plus, there would be a lack of diversity in the world leading to everyone looking the same.
Con: Faster Aging
The idea behind cloning is to harvest cells from a donor, raise them to embryonic stage in a petri dish, and then place them in a surrogate to grow to term. However, there is a possibility that the age of the donor could be imprinted on the growing embryo. Tis would cause premature aging issues and potentially lead to premature death.
Con: Security
People shed millions of cells throughout their day as their skin cells fall off. You can leave skin cells even on a computer keyboard, and those cells could be used to clone you if cloning becomes a reality. What laws would there be to defend your rights as the true non-clone compared to the clone? Would there be any defense against people collecting cells and cloning random people?
Final Note
Whatever your view on cloning may be, studies show that the clone would in fact not be completely identical to the original just as twins are not completely identical. Though they might look alike, twins have different personalities and enjoy different things. The same would be said of clones. Even if technology were created in which your memories and thoughts could be transmitted to the clone, your clone would still be a different person.