SOMETIME this month the Senate will vote on the Human Cloning Prohibition Act. The bill would make cloning human cells a federal crime, punishable by up to ten years in jail and fines of $1m. It would ban not just baby cloning (that is, transplanting a cloned embryo into a woman's womb), but therapeutic cloning as well (embryo cloning in the hope of curing genetic diseases such as diabetes).
Supporters of the bill, sponsored by Senators Sam Brownback and Mary Landrieu, say the debate will be the first opportunity for Congress to regulate the hard ethical dilemmas raised by biomedical advances. (Last year's narrower debate over the related subject of stem-cell research ended in George Bush deciding that it could get government money.) The House of Representatives passed a version of the Senate cloning bill last July. Mr Bush has said he will sign the ban if it passes.
Opponents view the bill as an attack on basic science. They back a rival measure, sponsored by Senators Edward Kennedy and Arlen Specter, to ban baby cloning but permit the therapeutic kind. This will be debated at the same time.
Unsurprisingly, the debate has been dominated by the extremes. Francis Fukuyama, a writer and critic of human cloning, complains that opposition to the Senate ban comes from an unholy alliance of anything-goes libertarians and left-wingers who want to perfect human nature. But a similar charge could be levied against the banners, who include both the religious right and left-wing Luddites. There are five basic arguments to ban it.
The most basic of all is that it involves killing a potential human being. In cloning, the nucleus of an ordinary cell, such as skin or muscle, is placed in an egg from which the nucleus has been removed. It is stimulated in the hope that the cell can then be reprogrammed and develop into an embryo, from which stem cells (which can turn themselves into any sort of cell) can be removed. Because the egg has had its nucleus removed, critics say that all cloning involves the destruction of potential human beings. Mr Bush has argued that it “would contradict the most fundamental principle of medical ethics, that no human life should be exploited or extinguished for the benefit of another.”
This view has decisive moral force for those who believe it (often those who also oppose abortion). The trouble is that not everyone believes it.
The other arguments begin with the slippery slope. Legal therapeutic cloning, argue some critics, would produce stockpiles of cloned embryos for research. Once that happens, it will be virtually impossible to control how the embryos are used. That would make it impossible to enforce a ban on baby cloning.
Other critics cite the precautionary principle. In the realm of genetics, it is far better to be safe than sorry. Senator Landrieu, a supporter of abortion choice, argues that cloning is too unreliable. In animal experiments, fewer than 5% of cloned, implanted embryos produce a healthy birth. Until it improves, that success rate necessitates a ban. Ms Landrieu does not want to ban cloning research in order to limit medical knowledge. Rather, she says, “there are safer, less worrisome means to the same end”—notably stem-cell research. She denies her bill is anti-research.
By contrast, people like Leon Kass, the chairman of the president's advisory council on bioethics, object to cloning precisely because of the medical advances it implies. They see cloning as a route towards a Brave New World of human genetic engineering. They object, in Dr Kass's words, to “the alteration...enhancement [and] wholesale redesign” of human nature itself. They paint scary pictures of society growing humans for spare body parts or as custom-designed children.
This “wisdom of repugnance”, as Dr Kass likes to see it, has been embraced by both conservatives and liberals. From the right, Bill Kristol, the editor of the Weekly Standard, worries that government oversight of the health-care system is likely to grow, so human cloning must be banned now to prevent state-mandated eugenics in the future. From a more liberal standpoint, Mr Fukuyama worries about equality if inequality is designed into people's genes. If an ordinary child and a genetically enhanced one are competing for the same liver transplant, who gets it?
Many of these objections could also be raised against stem-cell research. The last argument, specific to cloning, is the spectre of a vast embryo industry. Therapeutic cloning requires large numbers of eggs. On one estimate, you might need eggs from 80m women just to treat American diabetics alone. So cloning, argues Charles Krauthammer, a columnist and psychiatrist, “means the routinisation, the commercialisation, the commodification of the human embyro.” This fear resonates not just with the Christian right but also with the feminist left, which worries that women will be sucked into the embyro business unwillingly.
The cloners' charter
The debate on cloning has mostly been defined by those who oppose it. But supporters have at least six basic arguments.
First, they insist that an unimplanted ball of cells is not a person. Some argue it is even less of a potential person than a stem cell derived from in-vitro fertilisation, since cloning uses unfertilised eggs. Michael Gazzaniga, a member of Mr Bush's advisory panel on bioethics, says the cloned clump of cells “has no nervous system and is not sentient in any way. It has no trajectory to becoming a human being; it will never be implanted in a woman's uterus. What it probably does have is the potential for the cure of diseases affecting millions of people.”
Those potential benefits are huge. The National Academy of Sciences estimates that 100m Americans could benefit from stem-cell therapies. Cloning, they claim, is a better technology for harvesting stem cells because it could mitigate problems of tissue rejection, since stem cells are cloned from the patient's own body.
Next, the slippery slope is a myth. Charles Murtaugh, a researcher at Harvard University, points out that there is already a huge supply of human eggs that could easily move on to a black market. Allowing therapeutic cloning would make little difference to that. And he argues that a ban on baby cloning would be enforceable, if only because the procedure is so unreliable. “For every five successfully cloned babies, produced by an underground lab, some 95 women will suffer spontaneous abortions and miscarriages. In a free country like ours, it is impossible to imagine that none of those women would go to the press.”
By contrast, a ban on therapeutic cloning would be impractical. The practice is legal in other countries. The Brownback-Landrieu bill makes it illegal for Americans to import or benefit from drugs produced by cloning abroad. But would the FBI really arrest a patient with Parkinson's who goes abroad and is cured?
The only immediate effect of a ban, many scientists say, will be a talent drain. The Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research, an umbrella group for medical firms, universities and others, claims the bill will stop the best and brightest from entering the field in the United States. CAMR notes that one renowned diabetes researcher has already left for Britain, ostensibly because of the mere threat of a ban.
At heart, therapeutic cloning, argue its supporters, should be treated as innocent until proven guilty. Bad institutions and bad laws, not technologies, produce Brave New Worlds. Test-tube babies, they point out, raised comparable concerns when they were first conceived. Eugene Volokh, a professor at the UCLA School of Law, puts it this way: “Scientists should generally have the freedom to experiment, people should generally have the freedom to have important life-saving technologies, and parents should generally have the freedom to make their children's lives better, unless [cloning is shown to] cause serious, tangible harm.” Even then, lawmakers should seek the least restrictive ways of avoiding that harm. An outright ban, he says, does not meet that standard.
Faced with this balance of argument, the 100 senators are divided. To pass a bill requires not 51 votes, but 60, to override a filibuster. At the moment, supporters of neither the Kennedy-Specter nor the Brownback-Landrieu bill can muster 60 votes. The result may be a possible compromise putting a two-year moratorium on every sort of cloning. But the arguments will go on.