Reproductive cloning can help parents with no eggs and sperm create genetically related children.
Reproductive cloning can help lesbians to have children without the use of donor sperm. And it would allow gay men to have children without the use of donor eggs and a suragette. Though a surrogate would have to carry the clone
Reproductive cloning would allow people who have a child who has died to seek redress for their losses.
Cloning is a reproductive right and once it is said to be safe as natural reproduction.
Animals who are endangered can be cloned to save their species.
Cons of reproductive cloning
Here's examples of how reproductive cloning can be negative:
Reproductive cloning will foster an understanding that children are designed and replicated for certain traits.
Reproductive cloning would diminish the idea of uniqueness. It would violate the widely held convictions concerning human individuality and freedom, and could lead to devaluation of clones in comparison with non-clones.
Cloned children would undoubtitly be raised in the shadow of their genetic donor.
Reproductive cloning is considered unsafe. At least 95% of mammals cloned have resulted in failure.
Reproductive cloning can be considered unethical and against "god's" wishes. Many people believe that because clones were created by man, they will be unable to feel and empathize.
Conclusion
Cloning is a type of asexual reproduction. A child created by cloning would be an exact replica of an existing or deseased person. If you cloned yourself the clone would not be like your sister, or brother, it would be an exact copy of you. A majority of people do not believe that reproductive cloning is ethical. Most advocates of human cloning also advocate for genetic modification of the human species. The technologies needed for reproductive cloning are not up to safety stadards. Many countries have banned research on reproductive cloning. This means that the technologies for reproductive cloning are not going to be improved quickly. There is still a lot of research that needs to be done on reproductive cloning.