The debate over animal cloning continues to heat up
headlines, classrooms, laboratories, and legislatures. Certainly cloning
will affect our world for generations. The benefits and potential for harm
of cloning is presented here to encourage our readers to research the subject
and begin the process of forming informed opinions. Other suggested
reading is provided at the end of the article.
AGAINST CLONING:
What
is Animal Cloning?
Animal Cloning is the process by which an entire organism is reproduced from a
single cell taken from the parent organism and in a genetically identical
manner. This means the cloned animal is an exact duplicate in every way of its
parent; it has the same exact DNA.
Cloning happens quite frequently in nature. Asexual reproduction in certain
organisms and the development of twins from a single fertilized egg are both
instances of Cloning.
With the advancement of biological technology, it is now possible to
artificially recreate the process of Animal Cloning.
Development of Animal Cloning in the Lab
Scientists have been attempting to clone animals for a very long time. Many of
the early attempts came to nothing. The first fairly successful results in
animal cloning were seen when tadpoles were cloned from frog embryonic cells.
This was done by the process of nuclear transfer. The tadpoles so created did
not survive to grown into mature frogs, but it was a major breakthrough
nevertheless.
After this, using the process of nuclear transfer on embryonic cells, scientists
managed to produce clones of mammals. Again the cloned animals did not live very
long. The first successful instance of animal cloning was that of Dolly the
Sheep, who not only lived but went on to reproduce herself and naturally. Dolly
was created by Ian Wilmut and his team at the Roslyn Institute in Edinburgh,
Scotland, in 1997. Unlike previous instances, she was not created out of a
developing embryonic cell, but from a developed mammary gland cell taken from a
full-grown sheep.
Since then Scientists have been successful in producing a variety of other
animals like rats, cats, horses, bullocks, pigs, deer, etc. You can even clone
human beings now and that has given rise to a whole new ethical debate. Is it
okay to duplicate nature to this extent? Is it okay to produce human clones?
What would that do to the fabric of our society?
The Process of Animal Cloning
Initial attempts at artificially induced Animal Cloning were done using
developing embryonic cells. The DNA nucleus was extracted from an embryonic cell
and implanted into an unfertilized egg, from which the existing nucleus had
already been removed. The process of fertilization was simulated by giving an
electric shock or by some chemical treatment method. The cells that developed
from this artificially induced union were then implanted into host mothers. The
cloned animal that resulted had a genetic make-up exactly identical to the
genetic make-up of the original cell.
Since Dolly, of course, it is now possible to create clones from non-embryonic
cells.
Now animal cloning can be done both for reproductive and non-reproductive or
therapeutic purposes. In the second case, cloning is done to produce stem cells
or other such cells that can be used for therapeutic purposes, for example, for
healing or recreating damaged organs; the intention is not to duplicate the
whole organism.
Ethics of Animal Cloning
While most scientists consider the process of animal cloning as a major break
through and see many beneficial possibilities in it, many people are
uncomfortable with the idea, considering it to be 'against nature' and ethically
damning, particularly in the instance of cloning human beings.
The truth is that most of the general public are not aware of the exact details
involved in cloning and as a result there are a lot of misconceptions about the
entire matter.
In recent times, there have been a spurt of new laws banning or regulating
cloning around the world. In some countries, animal cloning is allowed, but not
human cloning. Some advocacy groups are seeking to ban therapeutic cloning, even
if this could potentially save people from many debilitating illnesses.
Points against Animal Cloning
In a large percentage of cases, the cloning process fails in the course of
pregnancy or some sort of birth defects occur, for example, as in a recent case,
a calf born with two faces. Sometimes the defects manifest themselves later and
kill the clone.
Points for Animal Cloning
On the favorable side with successful animal cloning - particularly cloning from
an adult animal - you know exactly how your clone is going to turn out. This
becomes especially useful when the whole intention behind cloning is to save a
certain endangered species from becoming totally extinct.
That this is possible was shown by cloning an Indian Gaur in 2001. The cloned
Gaur, Noah, died of complications not related to the cloning procedure.
Animal
Cloning: Old MacDonald's Farm
Is Not What It Used To Be
By Dr.
Lauren Pecorino
An
ActionBioscience.org original article
Ever since the announcement of the birth
of Dolly three years ago, additional sheep, cows, goats, pigs and
mice have been cloned. The desire to produce farm animals with
outstanding and useful characteristics is ancient. One of the
reasons that cloning is attractive is that it reduces the effort and
time needed for farmers to do what they have been doing for years:
selecting and propagating the best of the herd. Success with the
technique, however, has not been easy in these animals (less than 2%
efficiency) and barely achievable in other species such as chickens,
monkeys and dogs.
The science behind the
cloning
Dolly has the distinction of being not
only the first cloned mammal but also the first to arrive by
nuclear transfer.
The significance of the first cloned
mammal, Dolly, was that for the first time cloning was achieved from
an adult (differentiated) cell. To fully appreciate this point
consider that normally, one cell, the fertilized egg, contains all
of the information needed to multiply and give rise to all of the
specialized cells in the body. It is important to remember that
every cell in your body contains an identical set of genes. Cells
turn on and off different genes as they become specialized
(differentiated). For example, blood cells need the hemoglobin gene
on while skins cells do not. In cloning, we are requiring that a
differentiated cell (e.g. udder cell) reprograms or resets its
genetic information so that it acts as a fertilized egg. Indeed,
DNA-testing confirmed that Dolly originated from a differentiated
udder cell. The technique used, nuclear transfer, involves removing
the nucleus from an egg cell and replacing it with the nucleus from
a differentiated cell. Although this procedure had been attempted
for decades, Dr. Ian Wilmut and colleagues at the Roslin Institute
in Scotland were able to create conditions that allowed the adult
cell nucleus to reprogram its DNA, enabling their success with
Dolly.
Dolly was the first mammal to have
been successfully cloned from an adult cell in 1996. Source:
Wikimedia Commons.
Therefore Dolly answered a major
biological question “Does the DNA of a cell become irreversibly
modified as the cell becomes specialized and differentiates?” with a
clear NO. The DNA of a cell that has developed to fulfill a specific
function clearly can be reprogrammed to direct the development of a
new individual. New questions of basic science are being posed: “How
does the reprogramming occur?”, “What genes are involved in the
control of this event?”, and “Can all adult cells be cloned?” (some
evidence suggests not).
So far, most cloned animals die just before or
after birth.
There are still obvious problems as
evidenced from the numerous deaths of cloned animals that occur just
before or after birth. The problems may be due to the experimental
conditions under which the eggs are handled or may be an inherent
problem that arises because these animals only have one parent.
Normally, half the chromosomes of the new individual come from a
sperm cell and half from an unfertilized egg but in a clone all of
the genetic material (except mitochondrial DNA) comes from the donor
nucleus.
What lies ahead
Cloning is a big first step. Genetic
manipulation of cloned animals is the future direction of the
cloning frontier. It is here that concerns are loudly voiced and
take up headlines in the media. The public and the media’s views on
the future of cloning often ignore some of its potential benefits:
Changing genetic traits is the next
step in cloning - it can lead to medical benefits for animals as
well as humans.
Agriculture and Drug
Production: Not only can the best traits be perpetuated
but farm animals could also be used as “machines” for
large-scale production of medically important proteins. Polly, a
transgenic cloned lamb, is an example. She is able to produce
milk containing factor IX — the protein that is deficient in
hemophiliacs.
Maintaining Biodiversity:
Cloning may be an important tool for preserving endangered
species if currently practiced methods fail.
Biomedical Research:
Cloning can produce genetically identical laboratory animals
which can be used as models for human disease. The most commonly
used laboratory animal, the mouse, reproduces rapidly and its
genetics have been well studied. Mice have been successfully
cloned and will likely facilitate the discovery of new
treatments for disease. Jean-Paul Renard, of the National
Institute of Agricultural Research in France, is attempting to
produce cloned transgenic rabbits to study cardiovascular
disease in the hope of finding new treatments. In addition, it
provides a model for studying the interaction of nuclear verses
mitochondrial genes and for nuclear verses cytoplasmic factors.
Commercial Endeavours:
Noting that no live dog clones have yet been reported, the
company PerPETuate, Inc. (Connecticut) is freezing tissue from
family pets for the future. Researchers have had little success
in the steps required to make a dog clone, such as development
after nuclear transfer and embryo implantation into the womb.
Treatment for Human Disease:
Cells could be harvested from early embryos to provide cell and
tissue replacement without the hazards of transplantation
rejection. The U.K. government has recently accepted
recommendations from its chief medical to permit research using
embryos subject to controls, which include a 14-day limit (see
the Department of Health website listed below in “learn more”).
Clones will not be carbon copies of
the donor since environmental factors will influence their
personalities.
To clone or not to clone
humans
The cloning of human embryos for
reproductive purposes is illegal at this time. Yet it is still
important to examine the consequences and the likelihood of this
scenario. The media may dream up and forecast robotic cloned armies
of Hitler; however, identical twins illustrate that being
genetically identical does not remove their humanness. Identical
twins exhibit different personalities and behavior because
environment also plays a major role on who we become.
At any rate, there have been significant
difficulties with cloning primates, including an extremely low
success rate and a high number of abnormalities. These results make
it unacceptable to attempt human cloning at this moment in time. The
ethical and social issues that will arise in the future when more
efficient methods are developed leave some time for a resolution.
Some of the same issues that arose from in vitro fertilization will
be revisited (e.g., infertile couples, “replacing” the death of an
infant).
Conclusion
Cloning has opened many doors that could
lead to remarkable medical advancements but, as with all new
technologies, it will be accompanied by ethical and social dilemmas.
Today’s successes will pave the road to improving efficiencies and
help add to the basic understanding of our cells. Even Dolly’s
creator, Ian Wilmut, is focusing less on sheep and more on
understanding the mechanism of reprogramming our genetic material!