Advancements in technology, and a better understanding of the way that genes and DNA works has brought us to some pretty spectacular possibilities. One of these is the fact that we may be able to bring back animals that have been long extinct! Animals like the Wooly Mammoth, Tasmanian Tiger, and yes, even dinosaurs, could once again roam the earth. This possibility has gained quite a bit of attention, mainly because we have the resources and know how to perform these types of experiments. Would it be a good idea to repent for past generations wrong doings to these animals by bringing them back, or to let them lay with history?
1. Useful Insight
Bringing back animals that have been extinct off the planet for thousands, if not millions, of years could provide us with some very valuable information. Seeing the way that their bodies are structured and function would help us to better decipher the state of the earth before they became extinct. This would also help to fill in the blanks in the theory of evolution.
2. Advancements To Medicine
Another wonderful benefit that would come from the cloning of extinct animals is the advancements that would be made in the medical field. It would give scientists and researches a much better idea of how genes truly work, and this knowledge could be applied to the human species as well.
3. A Little Redemption
In many cases, the reason that these species became extinct in the first place is because of the impact that humans had on them. Deforestation, hunting, and many influences had horrible effects, and continue to have these effects, on all types of animal species. By cloning them and bringing them back into existence, we are offering them and us a second chance to live together in harmony.
4. Benefits To The Environment
It is no secret that the ecosystem has been in disarray for quite some time. The true cause of this can’t be pin pointed because it is likely a combination of many different things. One thing can be sure though, that when animals like the wooly mammoth walked the earth, the environment was in much better shape. Bringing these animals back could have wonderful effects on the environment.
1. Unknown Illnesses
Over time, viruses and bacteria develop and change, this is true for thousands of years ago as well. The animals that would be brought back would likely be carrying viruses and illnesses that we are not immune to, or prepared to deal with. This could cause a mass plague, and new diseases to develop that we have no cure or treatment for.
2. Exploitation
Another big problem that would come from bringing back extinct animals like the dinosaurs, is that they would almost definitely be exploited for their uniqueness. People have a natural wonder and curiosity about animals like this, and businesses would surely use this to capitalize on the venture. This would be very bad for the animals because they would not be able to thrive in a natural environment.
3. Playing God?
Moral issues are also deeply rooted into the idea of cloning extinct animals. Opponents firmly believe that bringing back a species that has been gone for thousands of years is playing God, and nothing good will come from the practice.
4. So Many Unknowns
There is no way to predict exactly what would happen if we had prehistoric animals roaming around the world, but that may not be a very good thing. We have no idea how it would impact the animals that are still here today, or what effects it would have on the environment. What we do know, is that it could happen would day, so prepare yourself!