Futurist Keynote Speaker: Posts, Slides, Videos - What is Human Cloning? How to Clone. But Ethical?
Human cloning: who is cloning humans and arguments against cloning (2007)
How human clones are being made - for medical research. Arguments for and against human cloning research. Why some people want to clone themselves or even to clone the dead (and not just cloning pets).
Why investors are moving away from human cloning and why human cloning now looks a last-century way to fight disease (2007)
Should we ban human cloning? Arguments against cloning
An abnormal baby would be a nightmare come true. The technique is extremely risky right now. A particular worry is the possibility that the genetic material used from the adult will continue to age so that the genes in a newborn baby clone could be - say - 30 years old or more on the day of birth. Many attempts at animal cloning produced disfigured monsters with severe abnormalities. So that would mean creating cloned embryos, implanting them and destroying (presumably) those that look imperfect as they grow in the womb. However some abnormalities may not appear till after birth. A cloned cow recently died several weeks after birth with a huge abnormality of blood cell production. Dolly the Sheep died prematurely of severe lung disease in February 2003, and also suffered from arthritis at an unexpectedly early age - probably linked to the cloning process.
Even if a few cloned babies are born apparently normal we will have to wait up to 20 years to be sure they are not going to have problems later -for example growing old too fast. Every time a clone is made it is like throwing the dice and even a string of "healthy" clones being born would not change the likelihood that many clones born in future may have severe medical problems. And of course, that's just the ones born. What about all the disfigured and highly abnormal clones that either spontaneously aborted or were destroyed / terminated by scientists worried about the horrors they might be creating.
A child grows up knowing her mother is her sister, her grandmother is her mother. Her father is her brother-in-law. Every time her mother looks at her, she is seeing herself growing up. Unbearable emotional pressures on a teenager trying to establish his or her identity. What happens to a marriage when the "father" sees his wife's clone grow up into the exact replica (by appearance) of the beautiful 18 year old he fell in love with 35 years ago? A sexual relationship would of course be with his wife's twin, no incest involved technically.
Or maybe the child knows it is the twin of a dead brother or sister. What kind of pressures will he or she feel, knowing they were made as a direct replacement for another? It is a human experiment doomed to failure because the child will NOT be identical in every way, despite the hopes of the parents. One huge reason will be that the child will be brought up in a highly abnormal household: one where grief has been diverted into makeing a clone instead of adjusting to loss. The family environment will be totally different than that the other twin experienced. That itself will place great pressures on the emotional development of the child. You will not find a child psychiatrist in the world who could possibly say that there will not be very significant emotional risk to the cloned child as a result of these pressures.
What would Hitler have done with cloning technology if available in the 1940s? There are powerful leaders in every generation who will seek to abuse this technology for their own purposes. Going ahead with cloning technology makes this far more likely. You cannot have so-called therapeutic cloning without reproductive cloning because the technique to make cloned babies is the same as to make a cloned embryo to try to make replacement tissues. And at the speed at which biotech is accelerating there will soon be other ways to get such cells - adult stem cell technology. It is rather crude to create a complete embryonic identical twin embryo just to get hold of stem cells to make - say - nervous tissue. Much better to take cells from the adult and trigger them directly to regress to a more primitive form without the ethical issues raised by inserting a full adult set of genes into an unfertilised egg.
|< Prev||Next >|
Thanks for promoting with Facebook LIKE or Tweet. Really interested to hear your views. Post below.
Join the Debate! What are your own views?
Yes cloning is wrong but there is no reason to fight about it see some people are right and some people are wrong there is no right answer
I enjoy, cause I discovered exactly what I used to be looking
for. You've ended my four day lengthy hunt!
God Bless you man. Have a great day. Bye
my site portal my site my site
cloning should never be aloud by united nations and it should be totly band because it will have many disadvantages for exampel peopel can be created throgh cloning and they can be forced to fight against a country
Its hard for me to believe that someone would do this...although there are definitely medical benefits to be gained this is not without consequence. I don't need a PHD in science to know that if you take something away from nature, you eventually have to give it back. What Im trying to say is that with cloning life, this earth and us as humans will lose our identity as a whole race.
We humans are an amazingly resourceful species, but while this helped us to survive all sorts of devastations in the past we should stop at a certain point. Its part of the natural world as a human experience to being born, growing up and exploring the world. We should stop trying to cheat nature and bending rules that existed for ions to our own will.
Remember guys that life is not cruel, its the people who try to control the natural process of life that make it cruel.
Peace everyone
my dad hitler would of loved this technology of clones
The only reason that I think cloning is looked upon as a bad idea, because it would change the world as we know it it would break down the morals and values of normal religions and people themselves. People wouldn't know how to act towards religion anymore. It would have seemed they we have been lied to all these years just so that we could be taught right from wrong, good from the bad.
All the people that say it is a lack of human respect and thinking thescientist will look at themselves as Co-creators, is all a shame. In my opinion they are trying to stop us fromfinding out that there is really nothing to believe in and that we did just come from dust. The catholics and other religions have that correct we did come from dust or should I say elements tea ting in such a way that it was perfect and life could thrive, but as people we see that as to big of a step and that it is imposibble. But it is not my friends somewhere else in the universe we are not alone. I promise you that. But this would be blasfomouse wouldn't it? Saying god did not put us on this earth and that humans were made just by sheer coincidence. Well get it through your heads because that's what happened! Lol... I will say that if we do clone a human and it acts the same as everyone else(it will be like teaching a baby all over gain yes of course)then it will prove that there is faulty in the Catholic and other religions. just think a world without religion (did you think of koas) because that's how it would be. Religion is a passifier to hale the human race and give it meaning, and a reason to work together. You all seriously aren't dumb enough to think it was real were you?? God and all the other ma in religions are creation story's and ways so that we can see life has a meaning and a higher purpouse but it doesn't we are just moving along in space like normal elements and particles of dust. You might say "well what about the big bang huh???" the truth is no one knows a DAMN thing about the big bang air how the universe got started get it through your heads. Religions are just a creation story to tell us how we magically came to be poof we are here. No that didn't happen! Cloning would prove every religion wrong and say god or whoever it is is not the sout create of life god would cease to exist and the world would turn to turmoil. This is my imput on the subject. I say if catholics are against cloning, then they are scared to be proven wrong. I challenge science and religion to go head to head on this and figure out once and for all if there is a god at all or gods science will provail trust me.
The only reason that I think cloning is looked upon as a bad idea, because it would change the world as we know it it would break down the morals and values of normal religions and people themselves. People wouldn't know how to act towards religion anymore. It would have seemed they we have been lied to all these years just so that we could be taught right from wrong, good from the bad.
All the people that say it is a lack of human respect and thinking thescientist will look at themselves as Co-creators, is all a shame. In my opinion they are trying to stop us fromfinding out that there is really nothing to believe in and that we did just come from dust. The catholics and other religions have that correct we did come from dust or should I say elements tea ting in such a way that it was perfect and life could thrive, but as people we see that as to big of a step and that it is imposibble. But it is not my friends somewhere else in the universe we are not alone. I promise you that. But this would be blasfomouse wouldn't it? Saying god did not put us on this earth and that humans were made just by sheer coincidence. Well get it through your heads because that's what happened! Lol... I will say that if we do clone a human and it acts the same as everyone else(it will be like teaching a baby all over gain yes of course)then it will prove that there is faulty in the Catholic and other religions. just think a world without religion (did you think of koas) because that's how it would be. Religion is a passifier to hale the human race and give it meaning, and a reason to work together. You all seriously aren't dumb enough to think it was real were you?? God and all the other ma in religions are creation story's and ways so that we can see life has a meaning and a higher purpouse but it doesn't we are just moving along in space like normal elements and particles of dust. You might say "well what about the big bang huh???" the truth is no one knows a DAMN thing about the big bang air how the universe got started get it through your heads. Religions are just a creation story to tell us how we magically came to be poof we are here. No that didn't happen! Cloning would prove every religion wrong and say god or whoever it is is not the sout create of life god would cease to exist and the world would turn to turmoil. This is my imput on the subject. I say if catholics are against cloning, then they are scared to be proven wrong. I challenge science and religion to go head to head on this and figure out once and for all if there is a god at all or gods science will provail trust me.
The only reason that I think cloning is looked upon as a bad idea, because it would change the world as we know it it would break down the morals and values of normal religions and people themselves. People wouldn't know how to act towards religion anymore. It would have seemed they we have been lied to all these years just so that we could be taught right from wrong, good from the bad.
All the people that say it is a lack of human respect and thinking thescientist will look at themselves as Co-creators, is all a shame. In my opinion they are trying to stop us fromfinding out that there is really nothing to believe in and that we did just come from dust. The catholics and other religions have that correct we did come from dust or should I say elements tea ting in such a way that it was perfect and life could thrive, but as people we see that as to big of a step and that it is imposibble. But it is not my friends somewhere else in the universe we are not alone. I promise you that. But this would be blasfomouse wouldn't it? Saying god did not put us on this earth and that humans were made just by sheer coincidence. Well get it through your heads because that's what happened! Lol... I will say that if we do clone a human and it acts the same as everyone else(it will be like teaching a baby all over gain yes of course)then it will prove that there is faulty in the Catholic and other religions. just think a world without religion (did you think of koas) because that's how it would be. Religion is a passifier to hale the human race and give it meaning, and a reason to work together. You all seriously aren't dumb enough to think it was real were you?? God and all the other ma in religions are creation story's and ways so that we can see life has a meaning and a higher purpouse but it doesn't we are just moving along in space like normal elements and particles of dust. You might say "well what about the big bang huh???" the truth is no one knows a DAMN thing about the big bang air how the universe got started get it through your heads. Religions are just a creation story to tell us how we magically came to be poof we are here. No that didn't happen! Cloning would prove every religion wrong and say god or whoever it is is not the sout create of life god would cease to exist and the world would turn to turmoil. This is my imput on the subject. I say if catholics are against cloning, then they are scared to be proven wrong. I challenge science and religion to go head to head on this and figure out once and for all if there is a god at all or gods science will provail trust me.
god dos nut want it guys so stahp
Next time check your spelling you hippy
i think cloning is a good idea, i can clone myself and have i can find out what i taste like.
It's a bad Idea because you would have to raise a little u
You would actually be tasting your father if you were cloned
nO MAN THIS AINT NO GOOD IDEA
i fink clons is gud ye, cus i am clon and am rely smurt
yeah that why you are good at spelling
clones is the same as burgers.. you can eat them
FEED THE WORLD!!!
EAT THE CLONES!!
LOL
why so seriose lets put a smile on that face
u were watching bat man
To "In every advanced technology humans make there's an equal consequence it maybe be good or bad. Weigh things first, if cloning has more advantages than cons, then maybe it only means we have to go for it." I agree. Like when we were trying to learn about our world, and what it's made up of, we discovered the atom. In 1905, Albert Einstein wrote the mass-energy conversion equation. And Sir James Chadwick, a student and co-worker of Lord Rutherford, in 1932, discovered the third fundamental particle of the atom, the neutron. This would provide an ideal projectile for splitting the nucleus of the atom. These steps helped to create the atom bomb, even though the research was meant to further our knowledge of the universe. There's going to be people who turn something wonderful or helpful, into something destructive. But if we let this stop us, we will never move forward. Yes, cloning has 'bugs' right now, but in the future they'll be worked out. Cloning can help save lives. Why would you prevent that? To this question, don't explain it with religion, because I too, am religious, yet cloning, I feel, is not against religion. Give it a chance before you condemn an idea. Give cloning a chance to prove it's worth before you lash out in protest. Think about it. If it helps more than it harms, can it really be that bad?
what if you clon something that can damage the world and might bring something that can kill people
What are all of the cons of human cloning???
Here are some that i did find:
1) Cloning would/will undermine individually and identity.
2) Cloning would potentially pose a threat to human diversity and cause a deduction of genetics
I think cloning is only good in the medical field for science reasons.
I am a clone, are you all saying its wrong that I was made?
siiiiiiike
I am a clone, are you all saying its wrong that I was made?
Clones are not real and if they are we will find you and exterminate your population.
NO MORE CLONES!
NO MORE CLONES!
NO MORE CLONES!
yes it is
no no no no cloning should never be done on earth
exactly
when someone you know or love dies, its best you let them stay that way, no matter how much you miss them.
when someone you know or love dies, its best you let them stay that way, no matter how much you miss them.
Agreed
cloning would be ok if people would categorize them as blood related family. I would love to have a clone brother, I could show him all the cool stuff to do and he would get me. what ever I would say he would think im top dog. sadly if he had a mutation I dont know what to do with him. and btw if the mother had a clone then the father would keep in mind that its wrong to do things to his daughter (even if its a clone) THe clone would see it differently and would look at the husband like a father figure rather then her twins husband.
shut up u are wrong
well nice comeback
it happens in real life that a woman has a child that looks almost exactly like the mother or father. if that father has any feelings for that person then they have issues whether or not the child was a clone.
Banning cloning is a good idea because if it is.only for life saving than that is fone
there is no e in wrong but ur statement is so ture
don't think that human cloning is legal,its ethically and morally
wronge
Thanks everyone for all your comments - an important debate. I know many of you are reading this page because of a college assignment or project - do feel free to post here a summary of what you have written for others to benefit from.
This is funny, people are getting so annoyed by others comments and yet they don't even know how to spell half the words they are incorporating into their comment.
Furthermore, cloning is not wrong; it is very good, it is just what people do with it that is wrong. We should not clone animals or humans, cloning should be used to help replicate organs and cells to ensure that we, as humans, can live better lives. That's my opinion anyway.
this is wrong what do they think this is a horriable thing these peple ar epritty much say who care if a life form dies we saved another and this is what they think oh let me take what o want and the toss them away like there nothing those people belong in hell.
Well I think that many people reading this page agree with you.
After reading the three points brought up in the article, I felt like I had to counter
Arguement 1: Health risks.
I fully agree with this arguement, it is immoral to clone humans considering the current state of cloning technology, but remember cloning through somatic cell transfer is still in its infancy.
Arguement 2: Emotional Risks
I am not trying to downlplay the trauma the cloned individual will feel, but theoretically it is the same as a child who has just found out his 'parents' adopted him. This theory can constantly be argued with, but at the end of the day, there will not be an answer until we clone a human and see how he/she reacts.
I say individual because the cloned human would be a person too, it may be a genetic copy of someone else, but will be an entirely different person with as many similiarities as identical twins.
Arguement 3: Abuse of technology
Every person who is pro-cloning agrees that this is not in fact an arguement against cloning, but simply a violation of human rights. Hitler, or any other person, could easily have done the same to naturally born people.
Think about how many times the bible has been translated. Then while you are at it think about how acurate our history books are. What we read is what the writer wanted us to remember. Who created the American Flag? If you think it is Betty Ross you need to Google it.
Though I believe in God, I also believe he gave us the intelligence to make ourselves better. And the means to do it. This is the best invention and we need to go with it.
im sure they have good intentions but they might be killing the next president! they are murdering the next generation!!!! god did give us a body but he never wanted us to duplicate it!
yes you are right because life is one and it can not be duplicated by individulas
yes you are right
cloning is amazin all u haters r rong init brap. haterz gunna hate.
how can you cite this?? LOL. it has good details for my bio project (:
havent any of you seen the 6th day?? wtf is wrong with you guys
i dont think cloning should be legal, its ethically and morally wrong
yes my friend you are right
I believe in cloning. It can help us in so many ways. If cloning were to be legal it would be a choice, an option, so if you're against it, fine it won't affect you if you choose for it not to. But if someone is dying and needs an organ, and they choose to clone an organ of theirs or they already have a clone of themselves completely healthy, then HELL, it's saving them! If you're religious and say that only God gives us the right to be healthy or not etc, then I would be slightly appalled but I respect your opinion. I do not believe God is real. How can you believe in something you CAN NOT see, hear, or talk to? For that matter, how can you believe in a BOOK. The bible can and was written by anyone and everyone who had a say in it. This is why I am a LaVeyan Satanist. It is not horrid and blood crazy like it sounds (thank you movies). It simply is: You are your own highest being in your life, you put yourself first and therefore by a means "worship" yourself. Because after all, if you do not love yourself you can not truly love others. By putting yourself as your own greatest being (in an non-conceited way) you are able to control and handle your life the way you should, and you are responsible for all your actions. Any "God" was created by someone, therefore you are in turn worshipping someone you do not know, so why would I do this? I wouldn't. You can say God created us this way and we shouldn't change it, but I'd have a few simple but harsh words to say to your "God" then. He's quite loving isn't he, with all the blood and hate and diseases and cancer etc? Worship your God all you please, but Cloning is the Future and it WILL happen one way or the other.
this is good bro but....
There is nothing wrong with cloning.
yes it is they come out all deformed and all
hello (: ilove clonin ;)
In every advanced technology humans make there's an equal consequence it maybe be good or bad. But in the case of cloning human its totally wrong but if its therapeutic cloning it may save thousand lives. Especially, those who have been in a drastic accidents or those lives are at stake. Weigh things first, if cloning has more advantages than cons, then maybe it only means we have to go for it. Just dig deep.
this is wrong. i will smite you sll
God doesn't exist. Deal with it!!!!!
god is real so you better get to knowing that before you go to hell
Cloning is totally wrong!
Gross!!!
if we could clone humans we could take dna from an athlete or someone and make countless soldiers. we would never run out of armies.
what if someone evil gets hold of the formula for making clones, they could make armies turn on us?
it would be good, to a certain extent. but not all good.
We would never run out of armies???....really.....Why would we even need armies then. if one country could clone soldiers, so could the others. Hellooo????
me, they also said that we would never reach the moon.. if we had walked up to a scientist from centuries ago and said that we would be flying in metal birds, and walking on the moon he would have said thta it's physically impossible and have us admitted to a mental hospital. so, in theory im not going to say thet its impossible, but if it does happen and the lifeform is sustainable i think that scientists need a HUGE raise in pay.
i think you have an excellent point waveryder, and also if hitler had had cloning abilites he probably would have got his way, so i think that cloning humans is wrong in some cases for the wrong reasons, but when it is used to give a couple that is incapable of giving birth, then i think it's fine. and also if they can cure disease by cloning a cell of it and showing the body how to defend against that disease, then im all for it :)
i think cloning is a global issue, and could help alot of people be happy, or to save llives.
if god didnt want us to clone he wouldnt have let us find out about it. right?
God made marijuana does that mean we should all smoke it?
Cloning is wrong.We should not clone people that can kill us
I am only 13 years old but I believe cloning is wrong. Who is to say that people will stop at cloning animals. I also believe that it is wrong and that its God's job to create people not ours. Also Hitler wanted to create the perfect race, think if he had our technology and he cloned what would he do? Do you really think cloning will solve any of our problems. Cloning a human will cost tons of money, money that could be used on other things
... God is not real.
hey dont say that hurhur god is real the bible is proof
,, yah u hav the point...
douche
i disagree with clones
that is so detailed.
and who says the bible is real?
god has three letters in it three sides to a triangle Illuminati confirmed
Cloning humans won't make them animals, that's impossible. What cloning can do is make long term diseases and illnesses for things that are cloned. They could die at a younger age than they are supposed to, that is if they even survive through birth
i think cloning is bad because so many things can g wrong when you are trying to clone something someone ar i mean someones best friend
i think if a person is unable to give birth to a baby but they want to have a baby then also cloning is not the right way to have a baby.they can adopt a baby from orphenage if they really want baby in their life.
choose adoption its eithical
i have been doing a project as weel and i feel it is against all odds i mean wut if they come out as an animal it is stupied cloneing is so wrong
You sound like you're a little kid and you clearly should not be dealing with matters such as cloning. They are way beyond your petite knowledge.
yes. we must clone. to save us all
what
how is cloning going to save us ?
cloning is bad. real bad. you can have SEX but there will be no babies...
gurl/boy u is a mess cloning will KILL us all DUHHH...!!!
WEE COULD ALL DIE BECAUSEE OF CLONING
PEOPLEE COULD TAKE OVER OUR LIVESS IF THEY LOOK LIKEE US WE COULD DIE AND OTHERSS WOULDNT KNOW BECAUSEE THERE IS SOMEONE WALKING AROUND LOOKING JUST LIKE US
by cloning cells and replacing diseased ones with them
Abbie^ thats not true there would still be a percentage and a chance to have a child. Same as with animal clones, many have reproduced successfully and had healthy babies that survived through their adulthood.
I agree with cloning can save us, think of all the abnormalities humans have these days, and cancers, diseases etc. Who's to say we don't deserve the chance to have a clone of ourselves, imagine all the things they could help us with!
And if we need organs? Shall we wait endlessly on line for an organ that may or may not come to us on time? If we could clone, we could clone a healthy organ and transfer it into ourselves faster than before, therefore saving our own lives.
What is the point of human cloning. If you arent able to have kids and you decide to have a cloned baby, you will have to live with the fact that its isnt real, its not yours, it was just made. Why would you want to live with all though opinions and facts. just image if someone came up to you and asked you who the father is, and you would have to say noone, just image how painful that would be for you just to say. Do you really want to live with the fact its not really yours? :/
Even if it is made, it is still part of you if you're cloning yourself!
True it will be hard but if that is thhe way they want to go then its their problem.
Me myself i don't agree with it becouse it will just be heart breakeing when they find out.
Worry about yourself and let other people make the choice of owning a 'fake' baby for themselves.
YES :)
We think that cloning is a bad thing because it could start reproudrucion!
why are people aganist cloning
because cloneing could ruin your future and your kids future, cloneing could over populate the world or we could clone the wrong things and it clould take control, is that what you want? hah. well im not saying all cloning is bad im for the cloning for donors and other good stuff, but is it neccesary to clone a whole human? there could be so many things that could go wrong, they, just like any other man made thing, could have several problems, physco running clones isnt really what i dream about at night.
r u jokin me??
didnt you read this article gosh!!
bcs it would be taking away gods thunder
i think cloning is so wrong....
who would what to me cloned not me..
whoever is for it they're stupid!!!
cloning humans would never work. Never ever ever ever
cloning does work u idiot
cloning is the future....
So you think the future is a child growing up knowing his mother is his sister, his grandmother is his mother and his father is his brother-in-law?? .....hOw NiCe -_-'
omg no it isn i got cloned and im dead
It is wrong to create something that wont even be the same thing as the real person.... brought in different homes.. raised different. I just think cloning is wrong and should always be banned and stop wasting money and time to think about cloning....
u r so rite im against cloning too..
i thin thats so wrong...
why would somebody liked to be clon..
I think that human cloning could bring many advances to the world. Cloning, to me, does not just involving human cloning. Cloning can be used to treat diseases and replace organs. Pretty sure it’s not just me but if you were dying because you needed a new heart or liver or lungs or whatever, you would enjoy having a cloned one. Having a cloned organ would mean no rejection of the organ from you body. Scientists have also said that with human cloning one of the first diseases they can fix is Leukemia. If you knew one of your kids in the future was going to get Leukemia and knew that it could be cured, can you still say you would be against cloning knowing it could possibly save your child? Or say your best friend was in an accident and got brain damage, would you support cloning if they said they could create new brain cells for him and he would be normal again, or would you let him suffer and be a vegetable the rest of his life? Say he became quadriplegic, Scientists have said that there is a possibility that new spinal cord cells can be made and walking again is an option. So maybe actually cloning a human or possibly super humans might not be the best for the world today but great medical advantages can come if cloning is not banned and further research is allowed.
I also think that on the "God" issue that this would be a real test. If a Clone of a human is done successfully and god exists then this clone would have no soul it would be not a person but a body that acts on instinct. And if this clone is fine and acts as if it were a real person submitted though psychoanalytical test ect.. Then god is not real.
that's why a Human Clone hasn't legitimately happened yet, (and it never will) becasue God wouldn't allow it. :)
Praying for you,
MC
dang thats alot
Forgive him Lord for He not know what he has said.
hey dont say god isnt real. if he wasnt real then how did we get here?
My oppinon on the subject is human cloning should not be allowed. It will cause problems we would end up using it for warfare sothen other countries would use it for warfare wich would be chaos it is already bad enough all of the war we have now.
Another reason is I am a religous person and I figure when god wants more humans he will make more. If he wanted humans interfering in the creation of humans he would ask for it. And not haveus call on our selves to create more humans expecially for evil purposes like war. Because a lot of our war ends up hell on earth.
i think it should be allowed because it it cool
fletcher of the funk
IKR ;] your weird ;]
Human cloning is stoopid and horrible! People should not be cloned unless they give permissioin to be cloned. Cloning without consent of the original person should remain illegal.
Would you want to have a clone and not even know???
I wouldn't.
>jazmine Smith
Manila, Phillipines.
i think tha human cloning is a good thing because it takes the attention off me and my sister for being inbreds, we are continuously making babies and i think cloning would be a good alternative.
can we join in on the inbredation
I believe cloning could be used to benefit the whole human species but at the moment it is just too risky and would result in many lives being lost.
Well it would be great to clone.Imagine losing your girlfriend and she dies and you just clone her
haha nice
i believe cloning is illegal because you mess around with genes and this could harm many people with many deaths.--
i strongly disagree
i agree with matt.
I stongry dissagree with you zoya.
you are stupid, cloning is great i am a clone and i love it, you are a racist towards clones
stupid idea
i reckon that if we keep reaserching cloning that 1 day all these faults will be fixed and that there will be no side effects to cloning
we just need to keep working at it like with everything we do
we'll get there 1 day and cloneing will have no side affects
and that extinct animals will live once again.
hundreds of endanged animals will no longer be endanged.
were basically making up for all we have done to all those poor animals that we caused to be endanged
Do people have the right to reproduce?
only if you are an elephant
it should not be done because god made one of us and everyone of us he made special. so i dont think we should make the mistake and go and mess around with nature. if god really wanted only two or more of the same person then everyone would have a natrual twin. but scince he made us special then i dont think the we should do any of it. so i think it is wrong to do stuff like that.(i am only 15 and i am putting those scientitis to shame)(my teacher said that)
While your opinion is respectable, please learn how to actually spell and use proper grammer before "putting scientists to shame".
thing is ... god dont exist my friend :)
i totally agree with you God is good isn"t he
First and foremost, the fact that you are using the "religious argument" is an invalid argument that doesn't back up your opinion. The United States Constitution gives us express rights to believe whatever we want when it comes to religion and therefore I could say that my half-chicken, half-monkey god disapproves of cloning and it would be just as valid of an argument. You are entitled to your beliefs and I respect you for that but it doesn't mean that you can use it as a crutch when arguing such a diverse and controversial subject.
Second, in my opinion, you are not going to convince anyone with any kind of intelligence that you have a valid point if you are (assumed) too ignorant to check your post for grammatical errors and spelling errors. Lack of capitalization and punctuation can make any post look unprofessional and compromise any chance of credentials. Even if you had a good point with cited sources that back up your claim, you portray yourself as an uneducated teenager without the skills to research such a complicated topic (which I do not believe is the case as you wouldn't be reading an article about this to begin with).
When you get to college, writing 121 and 122 focus on being able to effectively argue a point of view whether it is your own opinion or not and being able to find credible sources to back yourself up. I don't mean to be rude or arrogant, just giving my two cents.
I belive in god and heaven but god did not create us we started out like everything else we started out as little organisms called bacteria which grew and evolved until it couldn't evolve any more and here we are...
it should not be done because god made one of us and everyone of us he made special. so i dont think we should make the mistake and go and mess around with nature. if god really wanted only two or more of the same person then everyone would have a natrual twin. but scince he made us special then i dont think the we should do any of it. so i think it is wrong to do stuff like that.(i am only 15 and i am putting those scientitis to shame)(my teacher said that)
i recently did a report and this sight helped me very much. Lailah, I am only 13 but i think that your opinon was amazing. Your opinion helped me form my report (I am against it too), although i am in a different situation, i am jewish, therefor not obliged to be against it. Anyone who is interested in cloning, but likes interesting books, read the YA novel: "My Sister's Keeper" By Judi Picoult. And thanks to everyone again!
boo
What do you think about cloning?? Are you for of against or mixed (both, in different ways)???I really want to know...can you please reply me as soon as possible???>>>>>hehe thx a lot.
i was for cloning before i started to really think about it. Read my sister's keeper by jodi picoult. it really helped when i did my cloning report. now i am against cloning although i wish there was a different way to help those where cloning is the only way to save their lives. hope i helped
cloning is not ok