Less bullying. Bullying is horrible! I can't stand it anymore. Australian schools should be bully free! Imagine your son or daughter coming back from school crying because they are in fashion and everyone is teasing them for wearing unfashionable clothes. Oh, and your daughter or son would want new clothes to be in fashion, and clothes cost money!
Without uniforms kids can wear whatever they want, which is all good and well, but there is a lot of judgement. A lot of kids will pick on others BECAUSE of what they're wearing. Like for girls whose shirts are cut lower, or if a boy wears those checkered shorts that they seem to love so much. But with uniforms all of that is taken away because everyone will be wearing the same thing. I know your first questions will be: "But where's the individuality?" But it can still be there. Kids who roll their sleeves up or fold their collars differently, or who tuck their shirts in or leave them out. There are a LOT of factors to keep in mind.
Second, I know you'll say but that's teaching them conformity (that everyone has to be the same), but really? It's not. It's teaching them respect and to a certain degree discipline. Kids who wear whatever they want tend to think they can get away with a lot more, because their teachers/school staff aren't as strict. But by having them wear uniforms and enforcing it you are showing them that that's not the case.
Third of all, kids don't need to wear whatever they want to be different and individual or to express themselves. There are other ways. The quality of their schoolwork, drawings, writings, attitude, etc... The list goes on.
Another thing is that with uniforms there won't be any place for judgement or prejudices based on appearance, or at least not as much.
Now, a lot of you will probably say that making kids wear uniforms is the same thing as making them all the same race, religion, sexual orientation, color, have the same hair color/length, no tattoos or piercings, and more. But really, it's not. Giving kids uniforms only means that there won't be anymore sagging, or as much skin, and it certainly doesn't mean that everyone will have to be identical. Kids need individuality. Uniforms just give them a larger margin for it.
Of course a lot of you will say it in fact gives them a SHORTER margin. But again, that's wrong. By giving them uniforms you are giving them opportunities to express themselves and their individuality in other ways.
And uniforms really aren't that ugly either, as I know that's what a lot of people argue. They can actually be really nice.
Long Beach California implemented uniforms in 1995 and these were the results (tallied recently); the overall crime rate by students dropped by 91%. There were approximately 90% less school suspensions. Sex offenses were reduced by 96% (a lot considering). Incidents of vandalism were reported to have gone down 69%. Assaults in grades K (P) - 8 decreased by 85%.
Norfolk, VA implemented uniforms in 1995 as well, and these were their results; leaving class without permission dropped by 47%. Throwing objects dropped by 68%. Fighting dropped by 38%.
So you see now why uniforms are the best course of action?
Students get bullied a lot just for wearing the non-brand clothing. Just because they're not wearing the latest fashion trend, students feel superior to others and make fun of them for it. It's not right and it's not fair. Certain parents can't afford nice clothing for their children, and they have to wear the hand-me-down clothing from older siblings or other family members. Wearing school uniforms stops students from making fun of students for their clothing, because everybody would be wearing the same exact thing.
Two days in a week is OK, not everyday though. Uniforms makes everything easier. We don't have to waste time picking out clothes, but cute uniforms can be good too. There will be no bullying about different clothes. I think uniforms can be nice too. The bad part is students can be bored with them after a long time, but generally they are good.
I want uniforms in school. The reason why I want uniforms is because they save money. Also, you don't have to worry about finding an outfit for the next day. You also would not be late for school and you will not get in trouble.That is why I want uniforms for schools.
You spend less money on the uniform. Before you say "no you don't! School uniform is expensive!" Just think about the money you'll spend when you have to buy different clothes just so your child doesn't wear the same clothes everyday because you know bullying can occur like that. So if you spent $500 dollars on your child's uniform that they'll wear for the year, and you think that's bad. Just think about the money you spend altogether on that one year off buying different clothes everyday.
Easier to be found in the school, at a field trip, and more, plus you won't be bullied about your clothes because you are wearing the same thing. Finally, no need to worry about you or other people wearing inappropriate clothes. Thank you if you agree with me about it.
there are many reasons for wearing uniform # 1 its safer. for example if u go on a field trip if someone gets lost it is easier to find them if they are wearing a uniform. # 2 its saves money it doent waste it. instead of buying 50 differnt outfits u can just buy 78 of the same outfit for school
I think students should wear school uniforms because it is cheaper! Parents spend hundreds of dollars every year just on clothes for their kids. The main reason why kids want those clothes is because they want to fit in. If all kids are wearing the same thing this problem won't occur.
When I say we can save time in the mornings it's that we can just find our clothes, comb or brush our hair, brush our teeth and eat our breakfast. When I say we won't get bullied as much it is because everyone in school would be wearing the same thing.
I myself want no uniforms on Fridays because if you were to think about it, if there was a fire or any type of natural disasters, a parent might want to come pick their child up and everyone is wearing the same thing and it might be hard to find their child.
Uniforms ugh this is by a TEN YEAR OLD. Uniforms, you can get teased by it getting dirty or by the way you were it you can be a bully target with uniforms. What is the point of uniforms? They don't help anyone, okay? I never had a uniform but it saddens me to hear that kids have to wear uniforms. They are colorless and just plain boring. Some uniforms show too much skin and nobody can express themselves with uniforms.
By requiring students to wear school uniforms, you (the schools/parents) are taking away not only the freedom to express themselves but you are also limiting the child wearing the uniform's imagination. As a kid everyone told me that there are over 7 billion people in the world but there is only one you. And that everyone's their own person. By making everyone dress the same, you are not making that a true statement
When you wear a school uniform you feel locked up inside, feeling that nobody really knows who you are. When you wear what you want to wear, you are being you and that’s what makes you different. Wearing school uniforms can discourage students’ freedom of expression. We don’t want to curb creativity.
I think that teens should not wear school uniforms because that is violating our rights. We have the freedom of speech so we should be able to wear what ever we want to school. The school does not have the right to decide what we have to wear unless it is inappropriate
If children didn't wear a school uniform then you would not need to got changed when they come home from school they would just need to go straight out ton play but if they were to wear a school uniform then you would be wasting a lot of time .
Kids should not have to wear school uniforms because it does not let them express themselves. Also, if there is a poor family that can't pay for the uniform the child will be bullied. As well as being bullied children will all look the same. I personally think it is very bad to have school uniforms, especially in public schools where children go just to get an education, not to be proper.
I don't think that kids should have school uniforms because it is a waste of money. It is also a way to make the kids feel like their going to prison in the mornings. It also cuts off their creativity. It also is a bad idea because the kids want to make fun of the brands the other kids are wearing.
2. If any student is involved in violence or has been attacked members of the public will not be able to tell what school they attended
3. Teachers will be able to identify students easier.
4. Students who are made to wear a school uniform are not able to freely express their tastes or individual style
As for me uniforms should be forbidden at school because it's a waste of parents money. Freedom of teenagers is primordial, they need liberty to take advantage of their youth and wearing clothing can describe a person. It allows to make economies. Uniforms shouldn't be obligatory for student. So, I don't like that.