An argumentative essay against school uniforms does not leave indifferent neither children or adults. The controversy surrounding the necessity of wearing the uniform does not cease even now and many pupils reflect this problem in their writings. The exact wording of the topic can be any. Some students prefer to write the essay on a more generalized subject matter, and someone wishes to illuminate some specific problem. In any case, this matter is topical.
Sometimes students find it difficult to create an argumentative essay against school uniforms. Meanwhile, its complexity is greatly exaggerated, and even a young pupil can handle such task easily and quickly, not to mention elder students. Naturally, each case will have different requirements and nuances, but do not forget that the goal of argumentative essay is to prove the author’s point of view basing on known facts, so there is no “correct” or “wrong” answer.
You can write about the negative or positive effects of the form. Mention how wearing a uniform can influence on the development of personality of students, instilling in them a desire to look neat, develop their work skills, etc. Those people who had to wear a form in their educational institutions probably still remember how carefully they washed their clothes and ironed them, so if you know such people it will be useful to speak to them and ask for their opinion.
What else to include in your paper?
To make your essay interesting you must write about real issues. For example, one of your essay arguments for and against school uniform can be the fact that the social inequality is one of the most pressing problems of the modern world. In this case, you can give a real example saying that in institutions where students are allowed to wear anything they want, some students, whose parents are quite wealthy, can come to the class in very expensive and stylish clothes. While not everyone can afford such things as opposed to cheap but high quality essay writing services. This makes kids feel like they are worse than others.
At the same time, parents, who can't afford to spend a lot of money on the expensive clothes for their growing child, are also experiencing this problem and they often start blaming themselves, which creates an unhealthy environment at home.
In your argumentative essay against school uniform you should write about such problems and show all the effects of this matter, be it positive or negative, and when you will have the complete image you should offer solutions.
You should write an argumentative essays against school uniforms that would reflect your personal attitude to this attribute of pupil’s life, and to make it more engaging you can also tell the story of its origin, and write a little about the modern fashion.
Currently the situation concerning this matter is different. In some educational institutions it is compulsory, while in others it’s not. To make your argumentative essay on school uniforms really high-quality and interesting you can try to analyze the academic performance of students from different institutions to see whether it will be different or not.
|Tweet|
Essay order form
Related Posts
Testimonials
He always gets to know the project in depth and makes sure I know what he is going to write and what sources to use. I like working with this writer because I have full control of the process.
This is Mrs. Perfectionism in her best format. She double-checks every sentence and number and the formatting of my papers is like a masterpiece! I recommend this writer to every obsessed client with very high expectations, like me.
I never thought someone who hasn’t actually been to my classroom can satisfy all the crazy requirements of my teacher, but he could! Now I’m going to be your regular client till I graduate.