Pros and Cons of School Uniforms - Latest Research in Ongoing Debate Nonpartisan ProCon.org Launches Its New Website on the School Uniforms Debate
SANTA MONICA, Calif., Sept. 10, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- ProCon.org, a nonpartisan research organization devoted to critical thinking on controversial topics, debuts its 51st issue website, http://school-uniforms.procon.org, and delves into the pros and cons of mandatory school uniforms using the latest studies, perspectives, and research.
Traditionally favored by private and parochial institutions, school uniforms are being adopted by US public schools in increasing numbers. Almost one in five US public schools required students to wear uniforms during the 2011-2012 school year, up from one in eight in 2003-2004.
Proponents say that school uniforms make schools safer for students, create a "level playing field" that reduces socioeconomic disparities, and encourage children to focus on their studies rather than their clothes.
Opponents say school uniforms infringe upon students' right to express their individuality, have no positive effect on behavior and academic achievement, and emphasize the socioeconomic disparities they are intended to disguise.
In response to the website's core question, "Should students have to wear school uniforms?," ProCon.org presents sourced pros and cons, a historical background section, videos, images, and over 130 footnotes and sources.
Some of the sources quoted include: Bill Clinton (pro), 42nd President of the United States; Dr. Nancy Bailey (con), author of Misguided Education Reform: Debating the Impact on Students; French Toast Official School Wear (pro), a school uniform supplier; and Dr. David L. Brunsma (con), Professor of Sociology at Virginia Tech.
The school uniforms website also features "Did You Know?" information bits including (sources available online):
- The first school district in the United States to require all K-8 students to wear uniforms was Long Beach, CA, in Jan. 1994.
- Americans spend around $1 billion per year on school uniforms.
- US schools with a minority student population of 50% or more are four times as likely to require uniforms than schools with a minority population of 20-49%, and 24 times more likely than schools with minority populations of 5%-19%.
ProCon.org President & Managing Editor Kamy Akhavan said: "We tackled this debate because many middle school teachers asked us for a controversial topic that tweens could relate to, because it remains a contentious policy issue for public and private schools, and because there was a gap in the existing research in this topic that our unique brand of nonpartisan research could help fill. We have no stake in the issue other than to stimulate critical thinking by presenting the best arguments on both sides."
For pros, cons, and related research on school uniforms, visit http://school-uniforms.procon.org
About Us
ProCon.org (online at www.procon.org) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit public charity whose mission is promoting critical thinking, education, and informed citizenship. Information is presented on 51 different ProCon.org issue websites in subjects ranging from alternative energy, gay marriage, and medical marijuana to the death penalty, illegal immigration, and Obamacare.
ProCon.org websites are free of charge and require no registration. The websites have been cited dozens of times by 21 international governments, 29 US state governments, and nine federal agencies reference ProCon.org.
ProCon.org had over 16.6 million unique readers in 2013 and more than 2.9 billion hits since its inception in 2004.
ProCon.org has been referenced by mainstream media 344 times in 2013 (over 1,350 times total), including: 60 Minutes, ABC, Associated Press, Atlanta Journal-Constitution, BBC, Bloomberg, Business Week, CBS News, CNN, CNBC, The Economist, Esquire, Forbes, FOX News, The Guardian, Houston Chronicle, Huffington Post, Los Angeles Times, Mother Jones, NBC, New England Journal of Medicine, New York Times, PBS, Reuters, Slate, USA Today, Washington Post, Wired, and many others.
For information about ProCon.org, visit www.procon.org
Facebook: www.facebook.com/procon.org
Twitter: www.twitter.com/procon_org
Pinterest: www.pinterest.com/proconorg
YouTube: www.youtube.com/proconorg
Tumblr: proconorg.tumblr.com
CONTACT: Kambiz Akhavan, 310-587-1407, kamy@procon.org
Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130208/MM57290LOGO
SOURCE ProCon.org
RELATED LINKS
http://www.procon.org