"Having had my own business, having had a thousand employees at one point, minimum wage was not an issue because we paid so much more than minimum wage. We had to have people that showed up, wore clean clothes, and, you know, on top of that a few of them could add and subtract, and a few of them could say please and thank you. Those were the people that had my job. But, minimum wage, look, I think he's [not clear to whom he is referring] missing the boat. Why doesn't he raise it to seventy-five dollars an hour? Well, of course he can't raise it to seventy-five dollars an hour because then prices would go way up and nobody would be able to afford to hire anybody. Oh, I see seventy-five is too high but $10.10 is just the right number? How do you arrive at that? Why not let the market place arrive at that? And I just think it's much to do, minimum wage is much to do about nothing. I mean, nobody works for minimum wage, back to this whole notion of showing up on time and wearing clean clothes gets you way above the minimum wage… I just think when government gets involved in setting wages, there's no stopping what government will intervene in doing."
Source: HuffPost Live, "Gary Johnson: Minimum Wage Is 'Much Ado about Nothing,'" huffingtonpost.com, Jan. 29, 2014
FORMER CANDIDATES
(Candidates who have withdrawn or who no longer meet our criteria appear below in black and white and in alphabetical order.)
"I strongly support the national movement to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, because it will lift millions of families out of poverty and create better customers for American businesses. Some people will say this is hard to do. And it will be. But leadership is about forging public consensus -- not following it. On this issue, we must lead with our progressive values to rebuild the American Dream."
Source: Marina Fang, "Martin O'Malley Backs $15 National Minimum Wage," huffingtonpost.com, July 16, 2015
"Millions of Americans are working for totally inadequate wages. We must ensure that no full-time worker lives in poverty. The current federal minimum wage is starvation pay and must become a living wage. We must increase it to $15 an hour over the next several years."
Source: Bernie 2016, "A Living Wage," berniesanders.com (accessed Nov. 23, 2015)
[Editor's Note: In 2014, Senator Sanders voted in favor of the Minimum Wage Fairness Act (S.2223), which would have raised the federal minimum wage to $10.10 after two years.]
"We need to leave it to the private sector. I think state minimum wages are fine. The federal government shouldn't be doing this. This is one of those poll-driven deals. It polls well, I'm sure – I haven't looked at the polling, but I'm sure on the surface without any conversation, without any digging into it people say, 'Yea, everybody's wages should be up.' And in the case of Wal-Mart they have raised wages because of supply and demand and that's good…
But the federal government doing this will make it harder and harder for the first rung of the ladder to be reached, particularly for young people, particularly for people that have less education."
Source: Steve Benen, "Jeb Bush Makes the Case against the Federal Minimum Wage," msnbc.com, Mar. 18, 2015
"[Ben Carson:] As far as the minimum wage is concerned, people need to be educated on the minimum wage. Every time we raise the minimum wage, the number of jobless people increases.
It's particularly a problem in the black community. Only 19.8 percent of black teenagers have a job, who are looking for one. You know, that — and that's because of those high wages. If you lower those wages, that comes down.
You know, I can remember, as a youngster — you know, my first job working in a laboratory as a lab assistant, and multiple other jobs. But I would not have gotten those jobs if someone had to pay me a large amount of money.
But what I did gain from those jobs is a tremendous amount of experience, and how to operate in the world and how to relate to different people, and how to become a responsible individual. And that's what gave me what I needed to ascend the ladder of opportunity in this country.
That's what we need to be thinking about. How do we allow people to ascend the ladder of opportunity, rather than how do we give them everything and keep them dependent?
[Neil] CAVUTO: So, sir, just to be clear, you would not raise it?
CARSON: I would not raise it. I would not raise it, specifically because I'm interested in making sure that people are able to enter the job market and take advantage of opportunities."
Source:Time, "Transcript: Read the Full Text of the Fourth Republican Debate in Milwaukee," time.com, Nov. 11, 2015
"First, I believe that minimum wage should be a state decision, not a federal decision. Why? Because it makes no sense to say that the minimum wage in New York City is the same as the minimum wage in Mason City, Iowa.
Secondly, we have to remember that a lot of minimum wage jobs are jobs where people start, and in those jobs they learn skills to move forward. So we need to be honest about the consequences of raising a minimum wage too high. One of the consequences is that young people who are trapped in poor neighborhoods will have less opportunities to learn skills and move forward."
Source: Emma Roller, "Carly Fiorina: Raising the Minimum Wage Will Lead to 'Less Opportunity'," National Journal, Aug. 17, 2015
[Editor's Note: Fiorina said in this quote and on other occasions that there should not be a federal minimum wage, which is why we have classified her position as being "Con" to raising the federal minimum wage.]
"If you're a waitress out there wanting more money, I'm not going to increase the minimum wage, I'm going to try to create an environment where somebody else will open up a restaurant across the street to hire you away at a higher rate, or they'll have to pay you more to keep you."
Source: CNN, "CNN Reagan Library Debate: Early Debate Full Transcript," cnnpressroom.blogs.cnn.com, Sep. 16, 2015
[Editor's Note: Senator Graham voted to increase the federal minimum wage to $7.25 on Feb 1, 2007 (HR 2, Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007) and voted against a federal increase on Apr. 30, 2014 (Minimum Wage Fairness Act). Because of Graham's Sep. 16, 2015 statement and his Apr. 30, 2014 vote, we categorized him as CON to increasing the minimum wage from its current level.]
"Instead of arguing over the minimum wage, why don't we help people get to a maximum wage?
Families can't live on $10 an hour much better than $7.25… Here's my question to you as a worker: would you really be satisfied with the bare minimum the government says you can earn? What if I could help you get to a maximum wage?...
I'd much rather help you make $50 bucks an hour, so you buy a house, put your kids in a good school and buy yourself a fishing boat. You'll need less from the government, which makes you a lot less expensive to your neighbors than you are now, and you'll pay more in taxes, which means you'll put more in than you take out. And then we'll start paying down the national debt instead of borrowing more money from China to spend some money we don't have. Instead of increasing the number of weeks of unemployment, where we pay you to not work, why not pay for your training to learn a skill that will get you to a maximum wage?"
Source: Fox News Insider, "Huckabee: Don't Settle for Minimum Wage, Work to Command a Maximum Wage," insider.foxnews.com, Nov. 2, 2014
[Editor's Note: On Apr. 10, 2006, while Governor of Arkansas, Huckabee approved a $1.10 increase in the Arkansas Minimum Wage, a 21% increase that brought the minimum wage to $6.25 (the federal minimum wage was then $5.15).]
"I want people to make a lot more than $9. Nine dollars is not enough. The problem is that you can't do that by mandating it in the minimum wage laws. Minimum wage laws have never worked in terms of helping the middle class attain more prosperity...
I don't think a minimum wage law works."
Source: The Maddow Blog, "Rubio Takes a Stand against a Minimum Wage," msnbc.com, Feb. 2, 2013
[Editor's Note: In 2014, Senator Rubio voted against the Minimum Wage Fairness Act (S.2223), which would have raised the federal minimum wage to $10.10 after two years.]
"Have it [minimum wage] be reasonable because if you could have unintended consequences if you start imposing a high wage, which could actually lead to fast food restaurants putting in kiosks and middle management people being upset that they can't get a raise so it's got to be reasonable... I wouldn't get into numbers right now... I just think that you have to be realistic and I think that management and labor need to sit down and talk about what is an effective way to help. Should we have sort of a gradual one in a while."
Source: James Brooks, "John Kasich: Minimum Wage Increase Should Be 'Reasonable,'" www.youtube.com, Sep. 1, 2015