The worker minimum wage has been around for a long time. The first minimum wage law was enacted in New Zealand in 1894, according the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), an international economic group. The United States introduced a minimum wage in 1938 during the Great Depression. Offering workers a guaranteed minimum wage has its pros and cons.
Pro: Provides Incentive
Through its online publication the Observer, the OECD reports that a minimum wage offers an incentive for unskilled and unemployed workers to find employment. Poverty puts a burden on a national economy, as the government is forced to try and assist those who cannot find work. A minimum wage ensures low-skilled workers that they will be paid a guaranteed minimum and encourages them to find work and provide for themselves.
Con: Slows Job Growth
Paul R. La Monica points out in the CNN Money article "Behind the Minimum Wage Debate" that a minimum wage law can discourage employers from hiring new employees. The guaranteed minimum wage can represent an expense that a small business may not be able to afford. If that is the case, small businesses will attempt to get more production from existing staff rather than paying minimum wage to new employees.
Related Reading: Laws & Regulations for Minimum Wage
Pro: Offers Job Security
During a weak economy, workers with minimum wage jobs benefit because they tend to be at the lower end of the pay scale, according to economist Lisa Scherzer in the SmartMoney article "Winners and Losers of the Minimum Wage Hike." Part-time workers making minimum wage could be given full-time opportunity to help save an employer the cost of hiring and training new employees.
Con: Is Applied Inconsistently
According to the U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division, each state has its own laws for minimum wage. The laws can vary greatly, making minimum wage an opportunity for some and a lost opportunity for others. As of June 2010, the state of Alabama had no minimum wage requirement, while the state of Washington had the highest minimum wage at $8.55 per hour. Inconsistent minimum wage laws around the country can keep some workers living below the poverty line while others are able to provide for themselves.
References (4)
- OECD "Observer": The Minimum Wage - Making it Pay
- CNN Money: Behind the Minimum Wage Debate
- "SmartMoney": Winners and Losers of the Minimum Wage Hike
- U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division: Minimum Wage Laws in the States
Photo Credits
- worker image by Robert Kelly from Fotolia.com