The world’s energy needs are growing. By midcentury the world’s population is expected to be nine billion, nearly 30 percent more than today’s.
More important, the push by developing countries to increase their standard of living is inexorably tied to a corresponding increase in energy consumption. World electricity consumption by midcentury will probably be between two and four times what it is today. And our aging power plants will have to be replaced before then.
This enormous demand for new generating capacity must be met while also containing global warming and minimizing pollution and other environmental damage. But how?
Solar and wind energy are nowhere near ready to take on this kind of load. Coal, oil and gas are polluters and major carbon dioxide generators — hence major contributors to global warming. Oil and gas also have geopolitical issues. Nuclear power is the only major electricity source that is both ready and does not contribute to global warming.
There is no question that nuclear plants must be built with the highest regard to safety. Modern nuclear plant designs therefore incorporate greatly enhanced safety features that, for example, allow a reactor to shut down and cool itself by natural forces like gravity and natural circulation, without external electrical power. Fukushima could not happen in these plants.
We need all the electricity sources we can get. Let’s not exclude clean and safe nuclear energy.
ZVI J. DORON Pittsburgh, Feb. 21, 2012
The writer is a retired nuclear engineer and a co-author of a book (in German) about energy and climate policies.
Readers React
Nuclear power is the most expensive technological failure of the modern age. Three Mile Island, Chernobyl and Fukushima top the list of its negatives. But in strict economic terms, it cannot compete. Solar, wind, geothermal, hydro and other forms of green power are cheaper, cleaner, safer, faster to build, require no federal limits on liability and create no radioactive waste. The same is true of increased efficiency and conservation. It’s time to recognize reality and leave atomic energy behind.
HARVEY WASSERMAN Bexley, Ohio, Feb. 22, 2012
The writer is the author of “Solartopia! Our Green-Powered Earth.”
I am writing in strong support of Mr. Doron’s letter identifying nuclear energy as the only clean and reliable answer to the world’s future energy needs. It is the only nonpolluting energy source that can provide the steady base needs of the power grid into the future.
As he says, the modern nuclear plants as approved for Georgia are passively safe, requiring no operator intervention to shut down in an emergency. One design, the Generation IV Integral Fast Reactor, goes even further in providing an answer to the waste problem through recycling and use of all the energy available in the fuel.
Modern reactors are being built overseas in many countries. If the United States is to be a major player in the world’s energy future, we must advance our nuclear power programs as quickly as possible. LINWOOD L. LEE Jr. Stony Brook, N.Y., Feb. 22, 2012
The writer is professor emeritus of physics at Stony Brook University.
Mr. Doron is correct that long-term economic growth requires investment in new generating capacity while curbing traditional and global warming pollutants. But increasing reliance on nuclear power is one of the costliest ways to achieve that goal.
The price tag for a new nuclear reactor is the biggest obstacle. Wall Street won’t finance one unless taxpayers co-sign, and the nuclear industry tried and failed to obtain more than $100 billion in federal loan guarantees. Skyrocketing construction cost estimates and the lack of financing — coupled with falling natural gas and renewable technology prices — mean that it is highly unlikely that more than a handful will be built in the United States over the next two decades.
Finally, Mr. Doron’s contention that new nuclear reactor designs “incorporate greatly enhanced safety features” is contradicted by the fact that the design selected for the two new reactors in Georgia, the Westinghouse AP1000, has a weaker containment, less redundancy in safety systems, and fewer safety features than current reactors.
It is too soon to judge whether the industry and its regulators have learned from their mistakes. In the meantime, let’s go forward with energy efficiency and renewables. They cost less and don’t generate waste that remains dangerously radioactive for thousands of years.
ELLEN VANCKO Washington, Feb. 22, 2012
The writer is project manager for nuclear energy and climate change at the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Assuming that Mr. Doron’s assertion that modern nuclear power plants can be operated safely is accurate, he leaves two important questions unanswered. First, how can we safely dispose of the spent fuel rods? And how can the world monitor the enrichment of uranium to the level needed for power plants, but insufficient for nuclear weapons?
Although construction of safe nuclear power plants may be feasible, and may help meet rising energy needs in the short term, ignoring the longer term implications of nuclear power may lead to even bigger problems.
CRAIG V. VANSANDT Carlisle, Pa., Feb. 22, 2012
Mr. Doron is right that nuclear technology is ready and does not cause global warming, but he is wrong not to mention the problems of unresolved waste storage, earthquakes, exposure to cyber and regular terrorism or the potential concentration of the fuel for military use.
He is right that the new Westinghouse design of the reactors approved for Georgia, with its gravity-based natural water circulation, is a step in the right direction, but he is wrong to imply that this is enough.
The key safety problem is manual operation. If the Fukushima reactors were automatically flooded as soon as the earthquake was detected, not manually and only several hours after the tsunami hit, there would have been no accident.
And Mr. Doron is wrong about renewable energy! In only a couple of years, all the roofs of new buildings could be covered by solar instead of regular shingles and could be provided with bidirectional meters to guarantee the continuous availability of electricity and the creation of millions of jobs.
Yes, Mr. Doron is right that our aging nuclear plants have to be shut down, but he is wrong to suggest that we can afford to build new ones or that solar energy is not ready to take over. It is, and it is not only safe, clean and inexhaustible, but also a fuel that is free.
BÉLA LIPTÁK Stamford, Conn., Feb. 22, 2012
The writer is an industrial safety consultant.
The Writer Responds
The writers’ replies range from full support to total rejection of nuclear power, with tacit agreement on one point: no expressed desire to see fossil fuels in our energy future. Yet coal and gas produce 70 percent of our electricity, and total demand is growing. It remains up to nuclear and renewable energies to fill the gap.
Some of the concerns of Mr. VanSandt and others are red herrings. Enrichment of uranium to bomb grade is unrelated to civilian nuclear power; see Iran’s centrifuges. Disposal of spent fuel is a political, not a technical, issue; Nevadans don’t want the Yucca Mountain waste repository, just as Cape Codders don’t want wind turbines off “their” shore. And the AP1000’s safety is enhanced by fewer active components, not compromised as Ms. Vancko suggests.
Construction cost overruns notwithstanding, most nuclear power plants produce electricity at competitive costs. Modern designs are modular, smaller and quicker to build (less interest costs), thus further improving economics.
The advantages of renewables are a given. But solar and wind together now produce less than 2.5 percent of our electricity, forecast by the federal government to grow to 3.5 percent by 2035 — a far cry from Mr. Lipták’s vision of solar shingles on every roof “in only a couple of years.” Hydropower remains steady at 6 percent. This is no “Solartopia” (to borrow from Mr. Wasserman’s book title).
Both nuclear and renewables are clean, noncarbon electricity generators that should be supported, but the vision that renewables alone can do the job in the next few decades is wishful thinking. Nuclear power is ready; let’s not get caught short.