Below you will find a nuclear energy pros and cons list, which covers the most important aspects of typical nuclear power plants.
There are 104 commercial nuclear power plants in the United States producing a whopping 806.2 TWh of electricity, in other words about 20 % of the entire electricity generation (2008). There is no doubt that the potential of nuclear energy is huge, but there are also downsides.
Before we get further into the pros and cons list, what exactly is nuclear energy? The basic gist is this: By separating an atom into two lighter atoms, there is a net loss of mass. This mass is not exactly lost, but rather transformed into massive amounts of energy. This is what is referred to as nuclear fission. By controlling these reactions we can harness the energy.
Advantages of Nuclear Energy
1. Relatively Low Costs
The initial construction costs of nuclear power plants are large. On top of this, when the power plants first have been built, we are left with the costs to enrich and process the nuclear fuel (e.g. uranium), control and get rid of nuclear waste, as well as the maintenance of the plant. The reason this is under advantages is that nuclear energy is cost-competitive. Generating electricity in nuclear reactors is cheaper than electricity generating from oil, gas and coal, not to speak of the renewable energy sources!
2. Base Load Energy
Nuclear power plants provide a stable base load of energy. This can work synergistic with renewable energy sources such as wind and solar. The electricity production from the plants can be lowered when good wind and solar resources are available and cranked up when the demand is high.
3. Low Pollution
It is in most cases more beneficial, in terms of the climate crisis, to replace other energy harnessing methods we use today with nuclear power. The environmental effects of nuclear power are relatively light compared to those. However, nuclear waste is potential harmful for both humans and the environment.
4. Thorium
Reports show that with the yearly fuel consumption of today’s nuclear power plants, we have enough uranium for 80 years. It is possible to fuel nuclear power plants with other fuel types than uranium. Thorium, which also is a greener alternative, has lately been given an increased amount of attention. China, Russia and India have already plans to start using thorium to fuel their reactors in the near future.
It looks like nuclear fuel is of good availability if we combine the reserves of the different types together. In other words, hopefully enough time for us to find cost-competitive greener ways of harnessing energy.
5. Sustainable?
Is nuclear energy renewable or non-renewable? This is a good question. By definition, nuclear energy is not a renewable energy source. As I mentioned above, there is a limited amount of fuel for nuclear power available. On the other hand, you could argue that nuclear energy is potentially sustainable by the use of breeder reactors and fusion reactors. Nuclear fusion is the holy grail of harnessing energy. If we can learn to control atomic fusion, the same reactions as those that fuel the sun, we have practically unlimited energy. At the moment, these two methods both have serious challenges that need to be dealt with if we are to start using them on larger scale.
6. High Energy Density
It is estimated the amount of energy released in a nuclear fission reaction is ten million times greater than the amount released in burning a fossil fuel atom (e.g. oil and gas). Therefore, the amount of fuel required in a nuclear power plant is much smaller compared to those of other types of power plants.
Disadvantages of Nuclear Energy
While the advantages of using nuclear energy seem to be many, there are also plenty of negative effects of nuclear energy. The following are the most important ones:
1. Accidents Happen
The radioactive waste can possess a threat to the environment and is dangerous for humans. We all remember the Chernobyl accident, where the harmful effects of nuclear radiation on humans can even be witnessed today. Estimates conclude that somewhere between 15 000 and 30 000 people lost their lifes in the Chernobyl aftermath and more than 2.5 million Ukrainians are still struggling with health problems related to nuclear waste.
Just last year, on March 18, a major nuclear crisis happenend again in Japan. While the casualties were not as high as with the Chernobyl accident, the environmental effects were disasterous.
History shows that we can never really protect us 100% against these disasters. Accidents do happen.
2. Radioactive Waste
Does nuclear power cause air pollution? The nuclear power plants emit negligible amounts, if any, carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. However, the processes in the nuclear fuel chain such as mining, enrichment and waste management does.
There are many arguments both for and against nuclear power. All in all I would say that the future of nuclear power looks promising. With new generations of reactors, potential major breakthroughs such as nuclear fusion, the methods we use to harness nuclear energy will get better in the next coming years. The question is: Do we need nuclear power or are the renewables a better choice?
Wind Energy Pros and Cons
Geothermal Energy Pros and Cons
Biomass Energy Pros and Cons
Author: Mathias Aarre Mæhlum
Last Update: 16 October 2012
Comments
William Monahan says
Greetings Mathias,
Would you consider including information on your website that would allow for APA formated citation of the valuable information and material you research, compile, compose and present on it?
For college students like myself.
Mathias says
Hi William
That`s a great idea and it will be implemented in the near future!
Miranda Amis says
Actually, MLA format is much more efficient for highschool students, seeing how everything we have to do is in MLA format.
Joe says
For high school students such as myself, essays in APA format are needed for our class. Thank you for the Infromation! It really helped me with my essay.
kate yolin says
yes i belive so!!
Lucas says
If i may know, on what year this article was published?
Mathias says
This article was published early 2012.
Lucas says
Thanks a lot sir.
kate yolin says
no problem
Kali yule says
i like this website
Todd says
Man…. all these comments are so respectful. Is this even the internet???
Stop says
Surprisingly yes.
Delany says
There’s no hipsters here, so nope. 😛
But not all of the internet is bad…
sarah says
i’m doing an essay on disadvantages of nuclear energy.. i just want to ask either all power plant use water as condenser or not??
Alex says
I myself am doing a research paper on nuclear power. A great book to read is “Nuclear Power: Th Future of Nuclear Power” by James A. Mahaffey. He goes in great detail about different generation reactors and how each function differently and different components they use.
Omar says
Mathias,
can I ask where you studied or what do you do? I’m doing a research paper and i want to use this information and i need to “briefly say” who you are or why you are qualified to speak on this.
A reply would help a lot
Shane says
Hello Mathias,
This is a really good source for my energy project. I’m doing nuclear power and this helps me with the pros and cons for it.
Thanks a lot.
Poopop says
Me and my group are doing nuclear power too!
Alainna Aparicio says
Good source!:)
Kat says
Thanks so much! can you make more pros though??
Ally says
This is a terrific article and was a great source for my alternative energy project. Thanks so much for creating this!
Jimmy says
You guys are way too nice. Whats wrong with these people? Argh!!
Noah says
No no no
Stephan says
What is the MLA format?
kit kat 2020 says
this helped me a lot thank you
Jessica Lee says
Thanks!! This helped a lot on my debate competition:)
Jakob bob says
This helped me a lot with my report
Owen Wheatley (14) says
Due to the limited amount of uranium on our planet(the fuel for a nuclear power plant) , it is expected to be an exhausted resource by 2035-2065. There for nuclear power is only a short term solution to a long term problem. Although, it can buy us time to develop new ways of creating and harnessing energy, or evolve our current methods.
Chris says
Official reports show not more than 60 people have died due to Chernobyl. You write 15000-30000… Where did you get these numbers from?
James Franklin says
Not just uranium is used to fuel reactors, many plants use plutonium for example.
Taylor says
Well, 2 people died AT the accident, 28-29 dying a few weeks after in the hospital. Chernobyl has long term affects that killed many. The 600,000 – 800,000 firefighters working on the case have all died or came across health problems because of the large amounts of radiation the plant is giving off. So basically the disaster had long term effects on the people around it, deteriorating health.
Ashlee says
this is a very nice safe site with no useless swearing- thank you for this awesome site so i can finish this grade six lesson study thing
Samson Damilola says
Can you kindly assist me with the “implications of changing from HEU to LEU fuel” for the case of the miniature neutron source reactor (MNSR)
Nicole Sanders says
Should nuclear energy be used as an alternative energy source to fossil fuels?
Bob says
Great source
geoff says
Nuclear power sucks
geoff says
i love nukes
Lewin turner says
yes
Nathan says
Hey Dude
Geoff says
Geoff says
once apon a time there was a man named Geoff. Geoff was a very kind man and always said hello to the children on his street and in the park. then one day he had a brilliant idea! he decided to give the children treats; like chocolate and peanut butter. he even invited them into his van with the temptation of puppies. after weeks and weeks of doing this a near by nuclear reactor exploded and he got cancer and died and the children lived happily ever after as mutated freaks outcast by all.
xavier Rangel says
also this is a good website keep the work up who ever made this!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Katy says
Just out of curiosity, how many different types of reactors (both fission and fusion) exist in the world today?
Samuel H Duncan says
Actually only about 30 people were killed from the Chernobyl because they ran straight into the nuclear reactor to throw material to stop the spread of radioactive material going more airborn. Yes there was spike in cancer cases in childern and women in a large radius around the the plant that could be linked to the accident, but it was not nearly as bad as the on averge 11000 deaths cause by just airborn coal emissions. Also, coal emission could be link to much larger accounts of risen cancer risk/cases, and that not just arounds that area where the fuel is burned its is polluting the world-wide with coals nasty bi products of dangerous carcigens and heavy metals.
Samuel H Duncan says
Annual coal emmissions*
Anonymous says
Notice that the accidents mentioned were not in the US? The health and safety protocols of our country wouldn’t allow those accidents to happen. Those were because of human carelessness, including overriding of the emergency shutdown system for an experiment. That would never be allowed in the United States.
Abbie Newcomb says
Thank you guys so much!!!!! This helped alot in myscience class. You guys are awesome
Jacob says
Although I doubt this helps now, if you click on his name next to when the article was last updated it will bring you to his google+ page where if you click on the about tab, under education you will see he studied Energy and Environmental Engineering at the University of Auckland.
James Place says
I think APA format is much more useful for highschool students and college students and en some middle cshool students and APA is a great way for this to be written.
James Place says
i enjoyed this information because it was very useful for a class project done in my eigth grade class and was very useful and reliable.
Duncan says
I agree I am doing an essay on energy and chose to go against nuclear energy.
Duncan says
I chose the nuclear crises in Japan. Just so you know not to be rude or a know it all but I found that the crises actually happened on March 16, 2011.
potato says
on the night that reactor four exploded in the chernobyl power plant, around 60 people were killed. in the long term, around 15000-30000 people were killed in the aftereffects.
Anonymous says
I’m pretty sure the comments are filtered.
Annie says
Not all hipsters are mean. Don’t be so stereotypical.
ella says
great! really helped me with my homework. Comments were strangely good too, obviously shows that no idiots use the site!
michiee ibarra says
I am doing an essay on Nuclear Power essay on my own opinion about this but I have no idea how to start this essay, I don’t even know what to write about I really need some help.
Dylan says
Mathias,
Can you please post your sources so I may show my teacher this is a credible source.
Starbuckz iz life says
OMG this site is tots my fav…….like yaaaasss boo
Linn says
This helped me alot with my essay, thank you so much!