One of the most heated and debated issues in today’s world is that of gun control. There have been high numbers of deaths involving fire arms in the United States, and people are beginning to take a stand against the violence and look for ways to solve the problems. Gun control is inflicting stricter and more harsh regulations on owning and carrying fire arms, which many people believe is the answer. However, arguers believe that the right to have guns is part of every American’s constitutional rights.
1. Lower The Amount Of Gun Related Deaths
As of today, it is fairly easy to get your hands on a fire arm. If the laws and regulations where made to be much stricter and more regulated, then the amount of people who die from gun violence could possibly go down drastically. Having to jump through a bunch of hoops will likely deter anyone looking to obtain a weapon to commit a crime.
2. They’re Rarely For Self Defense
There are hundreds of thousand assaults that occur each and every year, however, out of all of these cases less than one percent of people used a gun to defend themselves. The reason that someone owns a gun may be out of self defense, but it is much too often used for other things, like crimes.
3. Majority Of Mass Murders Use Legal Weapons
Large capacity magazines, fast shooting guns, and things like silencers make it all too easy for someone to inflict large amounts of damage to big groups of people. This causes horrible devastation, and many people believe that it can be avoided if gun control was more strict.
4. Less Suicides
The big majority of suicides that occur in the United States are done with a gun. These guns are legally bought and owned. If there is a much longer waiting period for purchasing weapons, and a more thorough check, then many of these suicides can be successfully avoided.
1. Criminals Will Break The Law
Illegal guns are a huge trade and business in the United States. Even if gun control laws where made much more strict, these criminals would still be able to obtain illegal weapons and use them to inflict harm and commit violent crimes. The only difference would be that the people who are not criminals would not have the ability to defend themselves.
2. Takes Power From The People
It is a constitutional right to be able to have weapons to defend yourself, including guns. While some restrictions should certainly be in place, if the government is given too much power over these types of things it would be easier for them to attempt to take all guns from citizens. This would leave the citizens open to abuse from the government, and leave them vulnerable for a fully police state.
3. Education Is The Answer
More harsh gun control laws are not needed. What is needed, however, is a greater focus on education about firearms. We should teach people from an early age the damage that they can do, how to properly and safely use them, and the steps to take to make sure that they are safely used and stored. Education is the key.
4. Helps Deter Crime
The biggest goal is to help lower the rate of crimes that take place, which gun control laws will not do at all. Rather than not allowing regular, law abiding people to own guns. If a criminal knows that a person has a gun, they are much less likely to attempt a crime. If criminals know that people no longer have guns, then the crime rates would greatly increase.
5. Creates Hostility
In today’s society, there is already quite a bit of animosity between the people and the government. The government is trying to obtain too much power over the personal choices of citizens. By creating more gun control laws, this hostility is sure to rise. When tension mounts, it will eventually erupt in the most unpleasant of ways.