I'm from the UK where it's very difficult to get a license for a gun, never mind a gun. The only people who really have guns are farmers, and officials like policemen and soldiers who need them. In America, 60% of all murders are caused by firearms compared to 6% in the UK. People in the UK aren't afraid because they don't have a gun, and most people in the UK don't want a gun. The issue of gun control isn't even an issue in Britain, as pretty much everyone in the UK is for gun control. You could argue that it's against your rights, but laws on drug consumption are also technically against your rights. Does this mean that drugs should be made legal? No. Gun control is needed. It works in the UK, why wouldn't it work in the US?
In support of gun control, there are fewer deaths and less violence if there are fewer guns in the hands of citizens. Less gun control is a uniquely American phenomenon--the Founding Fathers had no way to know in 230 years that people living in large urban areas such as New York, Chicago and Los Angeles would be angry enough to kill each other with guns over drugs and money on a daily basis. Countries with tighter gun control laws have far less violence and fewer deaths. If life is the most important thing, why aren't we doing more in America to preserve actual life as opposed to defending a way of life? More guns mean more deaths.
When was the last time we went a day without hearing about gun violence on a local, state or national level? How many people does it have to affect before we make changes in the way our laws are made? I do not propose that we take guns out of the hands of ordinary citizens, but that we make sure that those armed citizens are rational, well-informed and responsible members of society before we entrust them with guns. We have such paltry, barely enforced and completely underfunded laws in place now that it's no wonder we've had such tragedies taking place in this country. We need to put in place some common-sense laws backed up with real consequences for breaking those laws before it's too late for someone else's child or spouse.
Other 1st world countries with tighter laws don't have nearly the amount of gun related fatalities. People tend to focus on the crime aspect when it comes to guns. However, the majority of gun deaths occur from accidents and suicides, not criminals. Less people have guns = less people shoot themselves. Also, recent studies show that states with right-to-carry laws are associated with substantially higher rates" of aggravated assault, robbery, rape and murder.
The own reason why in the USA everybody can get so easily a gun is because there everybody lives in fear because of murders, rapes and orhers...
So the reason why there is so much fear, is because of guns! So if we prohibit guns for everyone there would be less criminal activity and less fear and so the people wouldn't need the guns anymore!
Studies show that the more guns a population of a country has, the more violence and deaths occur from shootings. We are known throughout the civilized world as having the least control over who owns guns and having also one of the highest rates of death by guns so obviously we are doing something wrong.
We have a right. The government cannot take away this right. Its unalienable. This country was built on the thought of independence, not for the country but for the people. The constitution states that we have the right to happiness. For me, shooting and knowing I have unalienable rights makes me happy.
If the goverment put more gun control or even if they made guns illegal there would be less deaths.Don't you want to make children at schools feel safe and protected.Most school lockdowns are because of crazy people with guns shooting innocent people.So doesn't the government want to make kids at schools feel safe and protected.In just New Mexico there has been 24 recorded school shootings imagine in the whole USA.We need to save lives now.
The right to bear arms is a very outdated amendment... Sure in the 1700's guns were needed to defend yourself, but today we have both the police AND the national guard if it gets really bad. The right to bear arms can still happen, but it needs more gun control
I'm not saying ban assault rifles and stuff, just sidearms. Sidearms are overall useless, mainly for shooting games and self-defense. You don't hunt with them in most cases and what are the odds that someone will actually try to kill you. Did you know that pistols killed 10X more people than rifles, shotguns, and assault rifles combined.
If you where at the store and a man with a gun comes in will you be afraid ? Of course. Now a gunner comes in a store and you are armed with a salt gun are you going to fell helpless? Of course not . We Americas needs guns!
The 2nd amendment says and I quote,"A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed." Is it me or does it seem like taking away our guns takes that amendment away? BOOOOOM! Argue with that.
DO you really think that a person that is planning to rob a store or your home at gunpoint would go to a buisness to get a gun? No, they will get them with no papertrail so no one can prove it was them! Also the average response time for law enforcement is 10 to 12 minutes. The fact of the matter is if you cant defend yourself within those 10 to 12 minutes the police will arrive after the crime is committed and the criminal is already gone. So it is probably in your best intrest to own a gun!
Criminals always find a way to get a weapon regardless of laws. They may even know how to make them themselves. Gun control would just make the citizens more vulnerable. Also, the 2nd amendment protects our ownership for guns. Guns are also used to stop tyrant governments which in the United States we have the right to do if our government becomes to powerful.
Gun control only. Is for honest citizens, people who already follow the laws. If a person wants to commit a crime, they can find a way to illegally obtain a gun. Also, millions of people already have guns in the United States. How would we be able to recollect all the guns??
Let's take a different approach to reducing gun related violence. What ammunition do most criminals use when committing crimes? Typically things like .22 and other small caliber rounds. Why? Because it's cheap in large quantities, and they can fit more per magazine. To reduce gun deaths, Every bullet should cost 500 dollars, because if every bullet costs 500 dollars, you're gonna think twice about shooting someone, "Man I'd blow your d*mn head off.... If I could afford it." The majority of criminals don't have much of a budget for a full magazine, even a small one like a 6 round, which will set you back 3000 dollars.
When planning to commit a crime, when has the criminal ever in history taken the law into consideration before planning and further committing the crime? You know who does follow the law? Legal gun owning citizens, who will be deprived of their firearms after stricter laws, while the law breaking criminals come in with their illegal guns and we lie defenseless.
Bad people are the problems, not the people who own a gun legally. If the government takes away our guns, in which they cannot due to the fact of the second amendment that our founding fathers created so we can protect ourselves from the government that was created to protect us. If we aren't able to own guns, and the bad people and the government owns guns. We are defenseless.
But if you think gun control will work then you are on something since no matter what you do criminals will use weapons. If you think they give any thoughts about laws then you are very wrong. Look at it this way how many criminals would ever say well i guess i can only use knives with gun control laws. NO! They would just shoot whoever ticks them off.
But if you think gun control will work then you are on something since no matter what you do criminals will use weapons. If you think they give any thoughts about laws then you are very wrong. Look at it this way how many criminals would ever say well i guess i can only use knives with gun control laws. NO! They would just shoot whoever ticks them off.