Pro or Anti Gun Control Only You Can Decide
Have you read any gun control debate essays recently? Have you taken the time to do any additional research at all, on top of the mixed and filtered facts that you can get from either side? There are so many varying, skewed, and downright dishonest, facts about both sides of the gun control debate, that it’s nearly impossible to figure out what side is giving the right information. And that’s no guarantee that either side is actually being honest.
- Gun Control Pros and Cons
Either side of the debate is going to have their own list of pros and cons of gun control. Even if pro gun control is giving the “cons of gun control” they are not going to be completely honest. They are not going list the pertinent facts, only those that make gun control seem better than
Pro or Anti, the Gun Debate Still Rages On
Debates on gun control continue to rage on all across the country, despite the impending debt ceiling and the government shutdown. Whether you take sides with the pro gun control debate, or are adamantly against it, we all have our sources of information that we pull facts from.
But how reliable are your sources? A lot of the time, people will take their data from places that support their own opinions. For example: those against gun control usually turn to sources like the NRA for their information, whereas those in favor of gun control will listen to a more liberal provider of facts and data.
The safest and most unbiased way to get your gun control debate arguments and facts are through a neutral party. Getting information from someone who does not have a stake in the outcome is the only way that y
The Average Gun Owner is Irresponsible! Three Reasons for Tougher Gun Control
One of the big headline stories has been the murder of 23 year old Christopher Lane, a baseball player from Australia who was gunned down by three Oklahoma teenagers while running. Why? The unbelievable answer was… they felt bored. This case and others like it have again raised the question, have we made guns too easy to access by people who are likely to misuse them?
There is no real debate against gun control to be had. There are only people who would rather argue than look at evidence, and then there are people willing to allow restrictions if it means a safer environment for everyone. We understand, however, that this is a volatile way to enter gun control debate arguments. So here are our three reasons we stand behind this.
1. The Second Amendment is Misunderstood
When it w
Three Thoughtful Gun Control Debate Questions
Gun control is an extremely hot-button issue right now in the United States. After the Sandy Hook Massacre, many people called for stricter interpretation of the Second Amendment. After the Boston Marathon bombing, Americans felt as though they needed to keep some form of self-defense since, clearly, the government could not protect them. The discussion rages on. Gun control debate arguments often devolve into close-minded shouting matches. When talking about gun control pros and cons, we have to consider both sides of the issue. Here are three gun control debate questions and thoughts from the two opposing perspectives.
- Would You Support Gun Insurance?
%3Cbr%3E
A popular idea coming from the pro gun control debate is the idea of gun insurance. As the Christian
The Pros and Cons of Gun Control
The arguments used to debate any difficult topic can inherently be viewed from two vastly different viewpoints. If that were not the case, it would not be a difficult topic to resolve. To illustrate, here are a couple pros and cons of gun control.
1) The right to bear arms is guaranteed in the Constitution.
The Founding Fathers saw personal gun ownership as a means to protect against tyrannical rule. Since its creation and through many changes in culture, our Constitution has shown again and again the wisdom and forethought of its architects, so it is only natural to continue to rely on it for guidance and authority. But the wisdom and forethought of the architects also included a significant amount of flexibility, along with the ability to change and adapt to evolving cultural and social norms. A
Weighing the Pros and Cons of Gun Control
Very few societal issues have been as polarizing in American culture as that of gun control. Each side of the debate seems to be working from a different set of gun control pros and cons. There have seeming always been “gun proponents” who guard their right to bear arms very closely, and there have conversely been those who advocate for more strict state and federal regulations on specific concerns like “assault rifles” and high capacity magazines.
With the debate at a fever pitch in the United States, an actual assessment of gun control pros and cons often seems completely impossible. The tendency is to resort to rhetoric rather than to adhere to the actual gun control statistics when attempting to objectively compare gun control pros and cons. To that point, according to the reputable, Pulitzer Prize winning site Politifact.com it is inherently true that compared to other European nations of similar economic development, gun homicide rates are significantly higher here in the United States. And yet this fact is often obscured during the course of a gun control debate.
These European nations, as well as Japan, boast lower murder rates to coincide with much stricter gun laws. Here in the United States, in addition to “gun show” loopholes and lax regulations in certain states that allow for citizens to use high capacity magazines like the ones used in recent tragedies in Arizona, Colorado, and Massachusetts, private individuals who sell their guns are not required to issue background checks on those purchasing the guns. Gun control advocates cite these examples of practical measures that could be taken to limit gun homicides.
Those against increased regulation often see such laws as a fundamental infringement of their Second Amendment rights. The focus on the “cons” side of the debate surrounding the pros and cons of gun control. The concern is that giving state and federal government more power in this area may lead to the unwarranted search of homes and seizure of weapons deemed “illegal.” The implication is that such abuse of governmental authority would effectively take away citizens right to defend themselves against tyrannical government actions, in this case the actions of the citizens own government,
There are seemingly no easy answers to the issue of gun control, and this very brief overview of gun control pros and cons is meant chiefly to start a respectful and meaningful dialogue among concerned citizens regardless of political ideology. The comment section below is the place for a civil and rational conversation about this issue of gun control pros and cons.
Finer Points Of The Pros And Cons Of Gun Control
There are many pros and cons of gun control. There is the one side that professes to believe that it is every American’s right to own and carry a gun, and there is the other side stating that this right should come with some restrictions to it. The first side would argue that the Constitution has made it clear how this country should handle guns and its gun owners. The second side would counter with gun control statistics, potentially pointing to the rise in gun deaths from violence and accidents when gun control laws are lax.
The interesting thing, though, about the pros and cons of gun control is that both sides have very solid arguments. Gun control pros and cons are obviously on polar opposite sides of the spectrum, yet people on both sides of the pros and cons of gun control debate have a point when they are discussing why they feel guns should or should not be controlled more by federal and state governments. They often have emotional ties within their own respective sides, which could be why they are so passionate about their causes and so unwilling to bend in this hot debate.
The pros and cons of gun control are talked about at great length in the nation’s teachers’ lounges, parent teacher conferences, school halls and even living rooms. Not many people are on the fence about this issue, which makes it something that perhaps will be debated for some time. This debate usually has clear cut sides, which again each have their compelling arguments for feeling one way or another toward gun control and its impact on American society, but the sides usually stand firm too. This is one fascinating facet of the debate and of the pros and cons of gun control as well.
Of course, the pros and cons of gun control are not really all that set in stone, even though most people do not waver on their beliefs when it comes to this intensely debated issue. But the pros can change over time on this issue, and so can the cons. As our culture changes, our need to debate this issue will continue as well, and it perhaps might even get stronger with time. It all depends on what happens in Congress and what Americans decide to do with the rights they have in front of them with regard to this issue.
An Introduction To Gun Control Pros and Cons
The pros and cons of gun control are a topic that are not likely to go away any time soon. Recent shootings that have happened across the country over the past decade, along with the push for legislation banning or regulating certain types of firearms have all caused many to review the gun control pros and cons that are expected to shape future debate. Gun control statistics have shown that there are some advantages to gun regulation, but that those advantages all have to do with having a more well educated gun owning population. Just taking guns out of the equation only reduce gun violence, but not all violent crime as a whole; crime rates in the UK and other areas where guns have been banned are a testament to that fact.
A look at gun control pros and cons reveals more about the American psyche as well. We have, as a country, always had the ability to arm ourselves for virtually any situation. It has not been until fairly recently that gun control has become such an important topic, although it is important to point out how the political poles have shifted within the past fifty years. The NRA originally began as a gun control advocacy group, which pushed for stricter controls and more education for gun ownership. It has since become what may be considered by some to be an organization that represents gun manufacturers more so than the owners. That stance is echoed by those who advocate for gun control in modern politics. When examining gun control pros and cons it is vital to think about the money and the message behind each side carefully.
The gun control pros and cons that are worth talking about are always those that relate to personal defense. The oft quoted phrase of, “If we make guns illegal, only the criminals will have them,” does have some measure of truth to it. On the other hand, criminals come to America specifically to purchase firearms due to lax regulations. A look at gun control pros and cons is about what that means, and the impact that it could be having on the entire continent beyond our United States borders. A closer review of gun control pros and cons will yield some important introspection on what we can do to reduce violent gun crime in this country, and in the future.
Hard Facts and Flexible Statistics
There are a lot of gun control statistics in the world and not everyone can agree on gun control pros and cons. For many people involved in the debate, the pros and cons of gun control are affected by their political opinion on the subject. And this, in turn, is often determined by the background that they come from.
On both sides of the gun control debate, people will naturally deviate toward the gun control statistics that best represent their point of view and suggest that it demonstrates that they were right all along. As Mark Twain once said, facts are stubborn things, but statistics are more pliable.
Gun control statistics are a complicated factor. They are almost always relevant to public policy in one way or another. In fact, the very concept of statistics, or the very root of the word, is related to public policy. The word statistic derives from the word “state” because the principles behind the theory were originally developed by the French mathematician Quetelet to keep track of all of the important facts about the state, both on a sociological and economic level.
Gun control statistics can go a long way toward helping people who want to learn the ins and outs of the issue. But it is very difficult for anyone who has no subjective opinion on the issue of gun control to develop an opinion on the issue. The reason is because few people will present the statistics that contradict their views on the subject.
For this reason, to decide where they stand on the issue, people first have to develop a sort of framework that they can use to determine what they believe is right and what they believe is wrong. Gun control statistics can go a long way toward helping people determine how facts on the ground relate to the world view that they have developed, but they might not be the choice for everyone.
Items Used to Debate the Pros and Cons of Gun Control
Recent tragedies in the world seemed to have sparked a huge debate over the pros and cons of gun control. It appears as if every radio show, TV talk show, news program, and opinion column in newspaper and magazines, brings up the debate over pros and cons of gun control.
When it comes to the debate over pros and cons of gun control, there are several elements, statistics, and events people use to support their stance on the issue. The following will look at just some of the elements, statistics, and events people use when trying to debate the pros and cons of gun control.
Statistics play a major role in helping people debate gun control pros and cons. Statistics can be found on almost anything that is related to gun control. Popular statistics that are used during the debate for the pros and cons of gun control can include the number of violent incidents related to guns, the number of mass shootings, the number of people who own guns, the number of deaths related to guns, and people’s opinion on gun safety.
Gun control statistics can also be used in a debate to support or fight a stance on gun control. Both sides can use opinion polls and people’s opinions on gun control to support the pros and cons of gun control. For example, an individual debating that gun control is needed could use a statistic that states over 80 percent of people in the state of Ohio feel gun control laws need to be tightened.
Statistics are not the only thing used during a debate of the pros and cons of gun control. Recent events can also be used. Recent events such as school shootings, local deaths related to guns, and other issues can all be brought up when people debate this issue.
The issue surrounding gun control is a hot topic. There will be debates regarding the pros and cons of gun control for years to come.